---
title: Relief with Orestes and Clytemnestra**
cat: 52
fabric: >
  greenish yellow in the front (Munsell 2.5 y 8/3), with orange highlights in the back (Munsell 5 yr 7/6), gray and very coarse in the core, with a friable consistency, and numerous calcareous and carbonous inclusions.
condition: >
  The relief has been reassembled and consolidated from a number of fragments; there are fills in the upper frame, in the background of the relief, and in left side section. The lower left corner of the frame is missing, as are the corners of the upper frame in the back. The male figure is missing its head and right arm; the female figure is badly damaged, missing both arms and almost all of the body; all that survives of a third figure is the feet and the attachment of the garment.
provenance: >
  –1981, Willard B. Causey (Santa Ana, Calilfornia), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1981.
bibliography: > 
  Unpublished.
---

The relief is framed, at the base and at the top, by fillets supported
on each side by a perpendicular element. The back is unworked and the
top is slightly concave. The incomplete state of preservation of this
artifact and the subsequent restoration attempts make it impossible to
establish with precision its original typology and function;
nonetheless, it can be conjectured that the relief was set against a
wall or in a niche; the traces of detachment in the back section support
this view.[^1] There are no remaining traces of the polychromy that may
originally have decorated this relief.

The figures were worked by hand and retouched to define the details and
to ensure that they would adhere to the background. They project from
the plane in full relief, as in many other *arulae* with mythological
subjects found throughout Sicily and Magna Graecia during the Archaic
period.[^2] In particular, the right foot of the male figure and part of
the corresponding leg emerge completely from the background; the torso
adheres to the ground only on the left side; of the third figure, only
the outlines can be discerned, and there are no traces of the part
corresponding to the body.

Significant comparisons can be made with a series of figured reliefs
from the sanctuary of Demeter Malophoros at Selinunte, previously linked
to *arulae* of medium and large format, but which might also have been
part of votive aedicules. In most of these reliefs, one sees the same
high-relief technique, which endows the images with great plasticity,
though in these cases the figures completely fill the free space.[^3]

The present relief depicts a nude male character shown in profile,
walking toward the right, with his left leg striding forward; he has
seized the hair of the central female figure with his left hand; his
right arm must have been extending forward in order to strike her with a
weapon, probably a sword, presumably positioned on a line with her
chest.[^4] The female figure is characterized by a slight torsion; her
right arm must have extended down alongside her body; the left arm was
probably bent toward the male character in an attempt at self-defense.
She is wearing a long, tight chiton that extends down to her feet; her
head is slightly tilted to the proper right. Her hair is brushed over
her forehead in wavy-edged locks with no part in the middle, and hangs
down on either side, forming three braids suggested by little spherical
elements. Her face is oval in shape, the mouth is small with swollen
lips, and the nose is triangular. The large almond-shaped eyes protrude,
with no distinction between the eyeball and the eyelids; her
superciliary arches are large, close-set, and parallel, and extend out
to the attachment of the ears. A third figure, stepping forward with the
right leg, was a witness to the scene.

The male character is rendered through plastic modeling, especially in
the legs and the strong, muscular buttocks; the torso is straight and
elongated. The hair falls behind the shoulders in large convex braids,
layered horizontally.

Due to a number of iconographic elements, the scene can be interpreted
as Orestes killing his mother, Clytemnestra, in revenge for her murder
of Orestes’ father, Agamemnon. In the absence of other identifying
features, the gesture of seizing the hair of a female character could be
the key to this identification, though it occurs elsewhere in mythology
as well. Notable in this connection are two fragments that can be
assigned to a metope from Temple C at Selinunte, with the scene of
Clytemnestra’s murder.[^5] The iconography of this metope is thought to
reflect an Archaic motif already present in the shield band reliefs of
Peloponnesian production, in particular from Olympia, in which, however,
it is more often Clytemnestra’s lover, Aegisthos, who is seized by the
hair just before the mortal blow.[^6] On the shield bands, this
iconographic scheme can also be found in scenes of battle between such
antagonists as Zeus and Typhon or Herakles and Geras. In a plaque from
the Argive Heraion, datable to the middle of the seventh century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, the myth of Orestes is
reprised in a depiction that shows Clytemnestra killing Cassandra,
gripping her by the hair with her left hand.[^7]

In the colonial setting of the Archaic period, the iconography of a
character seizing the hair or the head of a competitor or rival was also
utilized for other subjects engaged in combat, as is documented in
architectural sculpture and in *arulae*; examples include Perseus and
the Gorgon in the metope of Temple C in Selinunte and, in coroplastic
art, a fragmentary *arula* from Monte Saraceno, datable to the middle of
the sixth century BC, in which the left arm of Perseus is raised to
grasp the monster’s hair, while the right arm is bent upward, holding a
short sword.[^8]

The scene on the Getty relief was completed by a third figure, of which
only the feet, the edge of a long garment, and the outline of the lower
body survive. The state of preservation makes it impossible to identify
this figure with any certainty, but for narrative consistency, it may be
Elektra, Orestes’ sister, even though the depiction of this character
before the beginning of the fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> is uncertain. A female figure
on a bronze lamina from Olympia has been identified as Elektra, and
Beazley has recognized her as the character behind Orestes on a
proto-Attic krater. In the relief decorating the neck of a Cretan
*pithos* (storage jar), possibly the first known depiction of the death
of Clytemnestra, it has been suggested that the two female characters
might represent the queen’s two daughters, Elektra and Khrysothemis. In
the colonial milieu once again, for Metope 7 of the Heraion at Foce del
Sele near Paestum, it has been suggested, doubtfully, that the female
figure urging forward the sword-bearing man might be Elektra.[^9]

Orestes’ matricide is a relatively uncommon theme in the Archaic period,
and portrayals of heroes attacking female characters have been subject
to varying interpretations.[^10] In a gilded-silver lamina, now in the
Getty collection and datable after the middle of the sixth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, there is a similar image
showing the killing of Clytemnestra by Orestes: the hero, wearing a
short chiton, holds his mother by the hair and is about to strike a blow
with his sword, while she makes a gesture of supplication; at the feet
of these two figures lies the mortally wounded Aegisthos. A southern
Italian archaeological context has been proposed for this lamina, but
the general Laconian traits that can clearly be identified in this group
might also suggest the presence of bronze workers from mainland Greece
in Magna Graecia.[^11] An earlier Archaic bronze relief, mentioned in
the previous paragraph and linked to a tripod from Olympia, is also
comparable; it is datable to sometime around the end of the seventh
century and the first quarter of the sixth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> In that depiction, Orestes
strikes Clytemnestra with a sword while seizing her by the neck, as his
mother touches his chin in a gesture of supplication; the scene also
depicts other figures: Aegisthos, who is trying to hide behind a
building, and perhaps Elektra or Erigone (Aegisthos’s daughter) behind
Orestes.[^12] Another object that might attest to the diffusion of the
Orestes myth and these iconographies in the Peloponnese, and
particularly in Laconia, is a stele dating from the beginning of the
sixth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, now in
the Archaeological Museum of Sparta, was originally from the area of
Magoula. It features two figures variously interpreted as Menelaus and
Helen, Alcmaeon and Eriphyle, or Orestes a<span id="MacroHomeBase"
class="anchor"></span>nd Clytemnestra; the latter hypothesis is
supported by the violent gesture of the male figure as he seizes the
woman by the neck.[^13] This iconographic motif, therefore, was
especially prominent in the Peloponnese, from whence it diffused to the
West along with its possible ideological implications.

In the Archaic Peloponnesian context, Sparta was especially receptive to
themes linked to the saga of Orestes; the *Oresteia* by Stesichorus
emphasized the religious and social traditions of that city, which lay
under the protection of Apollo and counted the House of Atreus among its
legendary rulers. In the middle of the sixth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, the Laconian city was
pursuing a “pro-Achaean” political line, in which renewed attention to
the myth of the Atreides (Agamemnon, Menelaus, and their offspring,
including Orestes) and the recovery of Orestes’ bones served as
effective propaganda.[^14] The emphasis on Sparta’s illustrious origins
served to reinforce the city’s hegemonic role in the Peloponnese and
other areas of the Mediterranean, such as Sicily. In northwestern
Sicily, the saga of Herakles was put to similar use.[^15] Particularly
noteworthy is the role that Sparta played in the first half of the sixth
century BC: in northwestern Sicily, the Sicilian poet Stesichorus,
writing his *Oresteia* at this time, underscored the Spartan setting of
the poem’s legendary events. It bears mentioning, too, that at the turn
of that century, first the Knidian leader Pentathlos and later the
Spartan prince Dorieus were in northwestern Sicily to supervise the
control of the Sicilian emporia.[^16]

To return to another colonial context in which the Atreides saga
figures—namely the frieze of the Heraion at the Foce del Sele, mentioned
above, dating from the second half of the sixth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>—a new reading of its
figurative program raised a hypothetical identification of episodes
linked to the *Oresteia* in some of the metopes. In this perspective,
Metope 7 shows Elektra urging Orestes, armed with a sword, to commit
matricide; Metope 24 shows Clytemnestra holding a double-headed axe;
Metope 19 may depict Aegisthos seated on his throne as the hero attacks
him; and finally, Metope 25 is variously interpreted as Orestes killing
Aegisthos or as Achilles killing Troilus.[^17] The various
characterizations of Clytemnestra—“frightened and passive” in Selinunte,
but “combative and furious” at Foce del Sele (note here, too, the
aggressive stance of the heroes at Selinunte, such as Perseus in the
metope of Temple C, or Herakles in the Temple E)—have given rise to a
number of hypotheses regarding the derivation of sculpture from literary
sources, Stesichorus first and foremost. This approach has recently been
reconsidered in a study that analyzed in a more consistent manner the
relationship between images and texts or “segments of stories,” with a
special focus on the oral tradition, on the articulation of themes in
syntactic and hermeneutic terms, and on the social function of images in
relation to the context of origin.[^18]

Complex problems are involved in tracing literary sources that could
have influenced sculptural cycles and in attempting to derive the
various psychological articulations of the characters from these same
sources. It is nonetheless evident that the story of Orestes would
necessarily take on great significance within the *polis*, given that
the legend is focused on the guilty responsibility of those who violate
the moral rules of civil society—committing crimes that strike at the
very *genos* (clan) to which they belong—and on the divine curse that
struck the entire progeny and the obligatory series of purifications
that was then required. In that sense, the mythological themes present
in the monument’s decorations reflected the values and cultural
identities of the period and of that specific context.[^19] In this
light, the matricide committed by Orestes became a tragic but necessary
condition for freeing the family from an inheritance of guilt, but only
the intervention of Apollo allowed the hero, who was pursued by the
vindictive Furies, to attain a final purification and to be readmitted
to the community.[^20] It is interesting to note that in Column B of the
so-called *lex sacra* of Selinunte—for which a findspot in the sanctuary
of Zeus Meilichios, contiguous with the Malophoros sanctuary, has been
proposed—instructions are provided for individuals concerning the
purification rites to be performed in order to ward off the *elasteros*,
a term whose definition is uncertain but which probably means the
vindictive fury of a murder victim. On the same sheet (Column A), Zeus
is cited in the *epiclesis* (invocation) of Eumenes*,* with a clear
reference to situations of contamination and purification.[^21] As part
of this dual chthonic and purificatory role, Zeus would oversee the
cathartic rites required of an individual who was guilty of grave crimes
(such as the murder of a family member or a member of the same *genos*),
in order to be freed from hostile *elasteroi* and readmitted to the
community.[^22]

The hypothesis linking the current relief with Selinunte is strictly
conjectural, based on a reconstruction of the cultural context,
stylistic comparison with the reliefs from the Malophoros sanctuary, and
autoptic analysis of the clay, which seems to show the same
characteristics as that from Selinunte.[^23] If this link is sustained,
the Malophoros sanctuary and, in particular, the area of Zeus Meilichios
would suggest itself as a religious and cultural context well-suited to
house a depiction of Orestes, given that the Meilichios cult was
connected with heroic cults as well. The relief could have been placed
with reliefs depicting other episodes of the same story in a consecrated
space dedicated to the rituals of specific ancestral groups.[^24] The
myth of Orestes, it bears remembering, had great significance within the
cultural and religious milieu of Selinunte; the theme is also present in
a metope of Temple C in Selinunte, identified as an *Apollonion*. Here,
the treatment of the myth in the frieze appears to have taken into
account both the genealogy of the protagonist heroes, all of them
intimately connected to Dorian and Peloponnesian contexts, and the
geographic setting of their deeds. This criterion served as the tie
between the metope of Perseus and the Gorgon and that of Herakles and
the Cercopes (mischievous forest dwellers), perhaps linking the metope
of the Dioscuri with the metope with Orestes and Clytemnestra that
concluded the frieze on the left. Perseus is, in fact, the hero who
stands at the root of the Atreides family tree, while Orestes marks its
end. At the same time, the geographic setting of the narratives involves
both Argos and Sparta.[^25] It seems to be no accident that it was
precisely Argos in the Archaic period that exerted a powerful influence
upon Nisaean (mainland) Megara, where, according to Pausanias, the last
king was Hyperion, a brother of Orestes. In this sense, Selinous
(Selinunte), a subcolony of Nisaean Megara, affirmed its civic identity
in part through an explicit reference to the memorable places and the
origins of the community, in Argos and Sparta, in which the saga of the
Atreides played a foundational role.[^26]

It is through this thematic thread that the story of Orestes, drawn from
the religious and cultural patrimony of the homeland, must then have
constituted an ethical point of reference for the new *polis* as
well.[^27] Orestes, who in the wake of the matricide was obliged to
undertake a process of purification at the behest of Apollo (the deity
who oversaw family relations), would find an appropriate place in the
Malophoros sanctuary, in particular given that, among other things,
individual groups of aristocratic families seem to have had special ties
to the Meilichios cult and to the cult of ancestral spirits, as
previously noted in the context of the *lex sacra*.[^28] In addition,
more recent studies have conjectured that the Atreides were connected to
Selinous in part through the figure of Iphigenia, Orestes’ unfortunate
sister, who after her sacrifice by Agamemnon was transformed by Artemis
into Hekate. According to Stesichorus in his *Oresteia* and the
*Catalogue of Women* attributed to Hesiod, Hekate was the bride of
Hades.[^29] Iphigenia, thus associated with Hekate, would then have been
the subject of a chthonic cult—also linked to nuptial rites—that was
practiced in the enclosure at the eastern end of the Malophoros
sanctuary, outside of the *temenos*.[^30] In this case, as with the
Malophoros sanctuary and perhaps also the sacred area of the
Meilichios—whose existence is also hypothesized in Nisaean Megara—the
cult of Iphigenia, a constant mythical element of the Megarean world,
ultimately expressed a reprisal of the cults found in the Greek
homeland.[^31] Indeed, in Nisaean Megara, in the area around the agora,
there was a *heroön* of Iphigenia founded, according to legend, by
Agamemnon before the expedition to Troy: according to one version of the
myth, the hapless girl’s sacrifice took place in Megara and, as
mentioned above, the last king of the city was a son of Agamemnon and a
brother of Orestes.[^32]

It would hardly suffice to construct an interpretive model that
catalogued exact comparisons in mythological and cultural milieu between
homelands and colonies without taking into consideration the complex
processes by which the myth was redefined *in loco*. But it is clear
that the reprisal of the homeland cults in the *apoikia* (colonies)
underscored ethnic, cultural, and political affiliations with the land
of origin; this tie was especially strong in the colonies of
Megara.[^33]

A stylistic analysis of the Getty relief shows the coexistence of
elements of diverse derivations, which makes it problematic to place the
piece in a clearly defined current. The same holds true for much of
sixth-century sculpture from Sicily. The scene appears to be
well-balanced in the composition of solids and voids, and the figures,
aligned in a paratactic rhythm, seem to defy that spatial conception,
observable in both Archaic metopes and *arulae*, according to which
characters are imprisoned within the bounds of the figured field.[^34]

The coroplast made a special effort to attenuate Clytemnestra’s frontal
view, placing the feet on different planes and tilting the head toward
the viewer, to overcome the traditional Archaic view of front and
profile, though the result is not entirely persuasive and the figure
still appears slightly disorganized.[^35] The characters, in almost full
relief, jut sharply out of the background creating a well-defined
chiaroscuro. It is easy to perceive the coroplast’s skill in defining
volumes, such as the round plastic masses in the lower part of the male
body and in the articulation of the knee.[^36] Although the
interdependence noted between metopes and *arulae*, as discussed above,
is not well understood and may appear somewhat forced, it should be
pointed out that, in the milieu of Selinunte, there is evidence of a
stylistic affinity between the two.[^37] Orestes, for example, is
reminiscent of the Perseus in the metope of Temple C, though the
proportions of legs to torso are inverted, while the tubular arms, which
are proportionately too short and lack muscular definition, are tapered
and slender in comparison with the legs; Orestes’ small hands with
stylized fingers are reminiscent of those in certain figures of the
so-called small metopes at Selinunte, as for example in the Delphic
Triad.[^38] Additionally, the head of Clytemnestra presents a number of
stylistic affinities with figures in the small metopes, especially in
the cranial structure and a number of other details, such the small
mouth and the large globular eyes, undefined in their details, which are
also present in the figure of Apollo in the Delphic Triad.[^39] The
compact hair—with an undulating border, no center part, combed over a
low forehead, and falling to the shoulders in a compact mass of curls,
layered horizontally—recurs in the figures from an Archaic relief from
Selinunte (Casa del Viaggiatore), such as the figure in the small metope
of the Quadriga of Apollo. Some of these elements can also be found in
small bronzes of Laconian inspiration imported in the West, which could
have served as a source of stylistic inspiration for coroplastic
production.[^40] It is the metal objects that seem to determine the
Peloponnesian formal koine that emerged in the wake of an artistic
language developed by Sparta, and later by Corinth; this language is
recognizable, for instance, in the solid, vigorous modeling, in the
plasticity of the gestures, and in the clear, incisive outline.[^41]

For the figure of Orestes, for instance, it is useful to refer to
Laconian bronzes, such as a statuette of Hermes, datable to the middle
of the sixth century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>
This work shows a comparable definition of the calf muscles and
articulation of the knee, in contrast with the flat, elongated torso.
The latter would be functional in the case of the small bronze
statuette, facilitating the figure’s attachment to an object such as a
tripod.[^42] The general composition of the figure and the large,
undefined globular eyes hark back to characteristics of Corinthian art
that are readily identified in the coroplastic art of Selinunte as well
in some heads of Temple C.[^43] In this confluence—a distinctive
synthesis of varied cultural and stylistic features—traits belonging to
the eastern Aegean milieu do not seem out of place: especially the
flattened, elongated torso, which seems to contrast with the massive
lower limbs and rotund buttocks in the Orestes figure.[^44]

The Getty relief displays a stylistic language in which various
influences, mostly Corinthian, integrate into a formal autonomous
expression with references to the cultural roots of the homeland, which
in the dynamic colonial setting find a fertile context for new
elaborations. Religious ties to the homeland were affirmed—with a
certain adaptation to the local context—through an iconographic
conservatism.[^45]

For its figurative layout, compositional solutions, and stylistic
characteristics, the relief seems to fit chronologically in the third
quarter of the sixth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span>

[^1]: For the hypothesis that reliefs were either turned to a wall or
    embedded in a wall, see (for the Malophoros sanctuary) <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, coll. 118–19,
    181–82; and <span class="smcaps">Tusa</span> 1984,
    pp. 124–25*.* Terracotta *pinakes* and votive reliefs are well
    documented in the sanctuaries of Selinunte and in other Demeter
    sanctuaries; see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2009, pp. 200–202,
    for the stone votive relief depicting Persephone’s abduction, which
    may have been displayed in the propylon of the sanctuary. Also in
    the *thesmophorion* of San Francesco Bisconti at Morgantina, some
    *sacella* were provided with wall niches; see <span
    class="smcaps">Raffiotta</span> 2007, pp. 23–24.
    The presence of niches in the sanctuary of Demeter and Kore at
    Corinth has been variously interpreted: see N. Bookidis and R.
    Stroud, *The Sanctuary of Demeter and Kore: Topography and
    Architecture*, Corinth 18, part 3 (Princeton, 1997), pp. 145, 178,
    205, 229–30. In Olynthus, in a domestic setting, small altars and
    aedicules were set within niches: see D. Robinson and J. W. Graham*,
    The Hellenic House*, Excavations at Olynthus 8 (Baltimore, 1938),
    pp. 321–23. For examples of aedicules or altars set against a wall
    in Corinth, especially in domestic cult spaces, see C. K. Williams,
    “Corinth, 1978: Forum Southwest,” *Hesperia* 48, no. 2 (1979), pp.
    105–44. Less reliable is the hypothesis that the relief might belong
    to the front section of an *arula* created through the assembly of
    individual components before firing; in morphological terms, there
    seem to be no significant correspondences.

[^2]: See, for instance, *arulae* from Gela that can be dated between
    the middle and the third quarter of the sixth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, with Herakles and
    Alkyoneus: <span class="smcaps">Meijden</span>
    1993, cat. MY 8, p. 299, two *arulae* with Herakles and the Triton
    (550–525 BC) and a depiction of the suicide of Ajax (530 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>) in <span
    class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen</span> 1992, nos.
    14–15, pp. 45–46; the *arula* with a Gorgon from Capo Soprano, in P.
    Orlandini, “Gela: Ritrovamenti vari,” *NSc* 10 (1956), pp. 363–65,
    fig. 10; an *arula*, also from Gela, with opposing sphinxes, in
    <span class="smcaps">Lentini</span> 1993, pp.
    129–30; an *arula* with Achilles and Memnon from Locri, see V.
    Origlia, “Arule con iconografie varie,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco 1989,</span> pp.
    131–184, esp. no. 167, pl. XXVIII; from Hipponium, an *arula* with a
    figure of the *potnia theron* (mistress of animals) in <span
    class="smcaps">Lentini</span> 1993, p. 30, no. 31.
    See also examples in T. Fischer-Hansen, “Some Sicilian Arulae and
    Their Significance,” *Analecta Romana Instituti Danici* 8 (1977),
    pp. 7–18. For the iconography of *arulae*, see A. Calderone, “Il
    mito greco e le arulae siceliote di VI e V secolo a.C.,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Le mythe grec</span>* 1999, pp.
    163–204.

[^3]: Some very close comparisons, for shape, clay, and style, are some
    fragmentary reliefs from the second half of the sixth century BC, as
    for example one with a winged figure, probably an Erinys, at the
    Museo Archeologico Regionale di Palermo (inv. 42343), in <span
    class="smcaps">Meijden</span> 1993, FR 81; for
    another, unpublished, see C. Pecoraro, “Arule figurate di età
    arcaica e classica da Selinunte,” Tesi di Laurea, Università degli
    Studi di Palermo, Facoltà di Lettere Classiche (2001–2002), no. 24
    (inv. 42341). See also a fragment found in the propylaeum of the
    sanctuary, which still preserves the feet of three figures walking
    toward the right: see <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, pl. XXXII, no.
    4; a relief with two adjoining reclining figures, pl. XXXV, no. 3; a
    fragment with two standing female figures, probably imported from
    Ionia, pl. XXXII, no. 1; a fragment with two frontal busts, holding
    out their hands, pl. XXX, no. 4 (for this fragment, see also E.
    Gabrici, “Dedalica Selinuntina,” *Memorie dell’Accademia di
    archeologia, lettere e belle arti di Napoli* 5 \[1924\], pl. II, no.
    3); see also the fragments found in the excavations of 1898,
    incongruously filled, in <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, pl. XXX, nos.
    1 and 1a, and <span class="smcaps">Pecoraro
    2001</span>, pp. 38–39, n. 18; the two fragmentary figures (a female
    head and a male bust, with a hand holding it by the arm), assignable
    to a relief, in <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, pl. XXXII, no.
    3.

[^4]: The sword is a customary attribute in the iconography of Orestes,
    as will be explored below; in this connection, see H. Sarian and V.
    Machaira, s.v. “Orestes,” *LIMC* 7 (1994), pp. 68–76.

[^5]: For a discussion of the Archaic metope and the relationship
    between style and function within the cultural and social context of
    Selinunte, see <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span>
    2007, pp. 161–68; and <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2006, fig. 374; see
    also L. Giuliani*, Die archaischen Metopen von Selinunt* (Mainz,
    1979), p. 67ff., and <span
    class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1996.

[^6]: For the shield bands, see E. Kunze, *Archaische Schildbänder*,
    Olympische Forschungen 2 (Berlin, 1950), fig. 6, no. 1c, and pl. 8,
    no. 1f. See also: <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 104–9,
    figs. 45–47, 68–69. The relationship between iconographies on
    shields and a number of *arulae* from Selinunte was also emphasized
    in connection with the recurring motif of the quadriga, which is
    found both on *arulae* from the Malophoros sanctuary, and also in
    the metope of Temple C. For discordant considerations, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2006, p. 625–26.
    There are also two *arulae* from Himera, each decorated with a
    chariot, depicted frontally, and two grooms, one on either side,
    comparable with the chariots from Selinunte: in this connection, see
    <span class="smcaps">Belvedere</span> 1982, pp.
    87–89, pl. XVI, nos. 2–3.

[^7]: <span class="smcaps">Prag</span> 1985, pp.
    58–60, pl. 37a. The similarities between the materials found in
    Selinunte and those offered at Olympia suggest that metopes from the
    major religious centers of the homeland could, in some cases, have
    constituted a reference model, especially for the aristocratic
    classes of the Sicilian and Magna Graecian *poleis*. This would
    still be consistent with the dynamic local re-elaboration in the
    representation of myth that was evolving in Archaic Sicily. For
    relations between Selinunte and Olympia, see <span
    class="smcaps">Curti and Van Bremen</span> 1999*,*
    esp. nn. 29 and 30.

[^8]: For the metope with Perseus and Medusa, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 142–50.
    For the *arula*, see E. De Miro, “Aspetti della coroplastica locale:
    Le arule,” in A. Calderone and M. Caccamo Caltabiano, *Monte
    Saraceno di Ravanusa: Un ventennio di ricerche e studi* (Messina,
    1996), pp. 177–81, pl. CVIII.

[^9]: For the proto-Attic krater, see I. McPhee, s.v. “Elektra I,”
    *LIMC* 3 (1986), pp. 709–19, esp. p. 717, no. 73; for the lamina and
    the *pithos*, see <span
    class="smcaps">Knoepfler</span> 1992, pp. 29–30,
    fig. 11, and pp. 23–24, no. 2. For the metope from the Heraion at
    Foce of Sele, see <span class="smcaps">Masseria
    and Torelli</span> 1999, pp. 239–40. See also Elektra in a bronze
    relief from Olympia, in <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 165.

[^10]: For the iconography of the death of Clytemnestra, see Y. Morizot,
    s.v. “Klytaimestra,” *LIMC* 6 (1992),” pp. 72–81, and <span
    class="smcaps">Prag</span> 1985, pp. 35–43; on
    this problem, see also <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 1999, p. 32.

[^11]: The lamina, inv. 83.AM.343, has been published by F. Brommer,
    “Ein Silberstreifen,” *GettyMusJ* 12 (1984), pp. 133–38; see also
    <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp.
    164–66. The analysis of the relief was also pursued by P. G. Guzzo,
    “Una lamina d’oro arcaica d’incerta provenienza,” *Studi Urbinati* 3
    (1986), pp. 35–43, and by <span
    class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1996, pp. 24–25.

[^12]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Knoepfler</span> 1992, pp. 29–30,
    fig. 11; <span class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1996,
    pp. 24–25, n. 34; <span class="smcaps">Prag</span>
    1985, pp. 35–36, pl. 23a.

[^13]: See M. Pipili*, Laconian Iconography of the Sixth Century BC*
    (Oxford, 1987), pp. 30–31; <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 165–66;
    <span class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1996, pp. 20–21,
    n. 26; and R. Fortsch, *Kunstverwendung und Kunstlegitimation im
    archaischen und frühklassischen Sparta* (Mainz, 2001), p. 217, no.
    1832, figs. 152–53.

[^14]: This interpretation is analyzed by I. Malkin, *Myth and Territory
    in the Spartan Mediterranean* (Cambridge \[U.K.\], 1994) pp. 57–64;
    and B. McCauley, “Heroes and Power: The Politics of Bone
    Transferal,” in R. Hägg, ed., *Ancient Greek Hero Cult: Proceedings
    of the Fifth International Seminar on Ancient Greek Cult, Göteborg
    University, 21–23 April* (Stockholm, 1999), pp. 85–98. On the
    location of the *Oresteia* in Laconia, see <span
    class="smcaps">Cusumano</span> 1997–98, pp.
    773–83; and G. Maddoli, “Il VI e il V secolo,” in E. Gabba and G.
    Vallet, eds., *La Sicilia antica* 2, no. 1 (Naples, 1980), pp.
    3–102, esp. pp. 28–29.

[^15]: In this connection, see also the analysis in <span
    class="smcaps">Nafissi</span> 1991, pp. 140–41,
    with bibliography, and M. Sordi, ed., *I canali della propaganda nel
    mondo antico* (Milan, 1976). The special relationship between the
    Laconian area and a number of settings in the Siceliote world has
    already been identified for the *Oresteia* of Stesichorus, with its
    clear pro-Spartan tone; in this connection, see the essay by N.
    Luraghi, “Il mito di Oreste nel regno dello Stretto,” pp. 333–46 in
    *Mito e storia in Magna Grecia: AttiTaranto 36, 1996* (1997); the
    findings of Laconian ceramics in Sicily attest to a flourishing
    market dating back as early as the end of the seventh century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span> From the Malophoros
    sanctuary, too, Laconian vases have been found dating from the
    middle of the sixth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>; see P. Pelagatti,
    “Ceramica laconica in Sicilia e a Lipari: Materiali per una carta di
    distribuzione,” *BdA* 54 (1989), pp. 1–62.

[^16]: Knidos, at least beginning in 520 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, was considered a Spartan
    colony; therefore Dorieus could consider himself the natural
    successor to Pentathlos; see Malkin, *Myth and Territory* (cited in
    n. 14 above), pp. 57–64.

[^17]: For the metopes of the Heraion at Foce del Sele, see <span
    class="smcaps">Masseria and Torelli</span> 1999.
    See also P. Zancani Montuoro and U. Zanotti-Bianco, *Heraion alla
    foce del Sele*, part 2 (Rome, 1954); F. Van Keuren*, The Frieze from
    the Hera I Temple at Foce del Sele* (Rome, 1989); and M. C. Conti,
    *Il più antico fregio dell’Heraion del Sele: Scultura architettonica
    e comunicazione visiva* (Florence, 1994).

[^18]: For this methodological approach, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 1999, passim, and
    <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp.
    161–69, 207–9. On the *Oresteia* of Stesichorus and its various
    versions, see A. Neschke, “L’Orestie de Stésichore et la tradition
    littéraire du mythe des Atrides avant Eschyle,” *L’Antiquité
    Classique* 55 (1986), pp. 283–301; M. I. Davies, “Thoughts on the
    *Oresteia* before Aischylos,” *Bulletin de correspondance
    hellénique* 93 (1969), pp. 214–60; C. Mueller-Goldingen, “Tradition
    und Innovation: Zu Stesichoros’ Umgang mit der Mythos,” *L’Antiquité
    Classique* 69 (2000), pp. 1–19. On relations between the poetry of
    Stesichorus and the sculptural cycle at the Heraion at Foce del
    Sele, see <span class="smcaps">Masseria and
    Torelli</span> 1999, pp. 252–53. On Clytemnestra and the functional
    dynamics connected to the character, see M. Giuman, “Storie da un
    delitto: Clitemnestra l’uxoricida, questioni iconografiche,”
    *Ostraka* 14, no. 1 (2005), pp. 35–66, in which the author
    hypothesizes the coexistence of two parallel narrative traditions,
    which determined the diverse characterizations of the protagonists
    and the equally diverse structure of the differing versions of
    Agamemnon’s death, including those in iconography.

[^19]: See <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007,
    pp. 185–222.

[^20]: On the myths in relation to its original contexts, see R. Buxton,
    *Imaginary Greece: The Context of Mythology* (Cambridge \[U.K.\],
    1994).

[^21]: The inscription, dated by means of the epigraphic characters to
    the second quarter of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, has been published by M.
    H. Jameson, D. R. Jordan, and R. D. Kotansky, “A *Lex Sacra* from
    Selinous,” *Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies* *Monographs* 11
    (Durham, N.C., 1993). The *lex sacra*, an important work of great
    exegetic complexity, has been the subject of numerous
    interpretations and analyses; see, in particular, G. Nenci, “La
    Kyrbis selinuntina,” *ASNP* 24 (1994), pp. 459–66; F. Cordano,
    “Review of Jameson, Jordan, and Kotansky, ‘A *Lex Sacra* from
    Selinous,’ 1993,” *Aevum* 70 (1996), pp. 137–41; <span
    class="smcaps">Curti and Van Bremen</span> 1999;
    K. Clinton, “A New *Lex Sacra* from Selinunte: Kindly Zeuses,
    Eumenides, Impure and Pure Tritopatores, and Elasteroi” (review of
    Jameson, Jordan, and Kotansky 1993), *Classical Philology* 91, no. 2
    (1996), pp. 159–79. For the philological and epigraphic research,
    see L. Dubois, “Une nouvelle inscription archaïque de Sélinonte,”
    *Revue de Philologie* 69 (1995), pp. 127–44. See also W. Burkert,
    “Private Need and *Polis* Acceptance: Purification at Selinous,” in
    P. Flensted-Jensen, T. Heine Nielsen, and L. Rubinstein, eds.,
    *Polis & Politics: Studies in Ancient Greek History* (Copenhagen,
    2000), pp. 207–16; <span
    class="smcaps">Cusumano</span> 1997–98, pp.
    780–82; and A. Brugnone, “Una laminetta iscritta da Selinunte,”
    *SicArch* 30 (1997), pp. 121–30. According to another
    interpretation, the sacred law of Selinunte and the purification
    rites were not connected to bloodshed: see A. Giuliani, “La
    purificazione degli *elasteroi* nella legge sacra di Selinunte,”
    *Aevum* 72 (1998), pp. 68–89; and C. Antonetti and S. De Vido,
    “Cittadini, non cittadini e stranieri nei santuari della Malophoros
    e del Meilichios di Selinunte,” in A. Naso, ed., *Stranieri e non
    cittadini nei santuari greci: Atti del convegno internazionale*
    (Florence, 2006), pp. 410–51; A. Di Martino, “Omicidio,
    contaminazione, purificazione: Il caso della lex sacra di
    Selinunte,” *ASNP* 8 (2006), pp. 305–49.

[^22]: Both Myskos and Euthydamos, mentioned in the *lex sacra,* aside
    from being identified as local heroes, are interpreted as
    personifications of two concepts bound up, respectively, with an
    impure, negative situation and a positive situation. For this
    interpretation, see <span class="smcaps">Curti and
    Van Bremen</span> 1999, pp. 21–33. The authors place the
    tomb-*heroön* of Myskos in certain structures of the Meilichios
    sanctuary previously studied by Gabrici, and interpret the two
    terracotta cylinders beneath the foundation blocks as containers of
    the offerings to the Tritopatores (a trio of gods, currently little
    understood). For the meaning of *elasteroi* in connection with the
    mythical model of Orestes, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 207–9.

[^23]: See, for instance, the comparable clay in reliefs of certain
    local provenience in <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, pls. XXXI,
    nos. 3 and 6; XXXII no. 3; and XXXIV, no. 4. It should be noted that
    the *lex sacra* became part of the Getty collection in 1981, the
    year in which some distinctive twinned stelai from the sanctuary of
    Zeus Meilichios were also acquired (inv. 81.AA.135, 81.AA.136,
    81.AA.137, 81.AA.138, 81.AA.139a-d); this coincidence in dates may
    reinforce the hypothesis that the current object is also from
    Selinunte.

[^24]: On the pertinence and significance of the subject in the
    Selinunte area, see also <span
    class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1996, pp. 31–33.
    According to a hypothesis that merits further attention, a
    fragmentary terracotta relief from the Malophoros sanctuary might be
    a portrayal of the same subject: an armed male character faces a
    figure looking to the right; of a third character, perhaps
    Aegisthos, there remain only scant traces. If this identification
    holds, it would be further evidence of the presence in Selinunte of
    an ancient iconographic tradition linked to the hero; see <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, col. 188–89,
    pl. XXX, no. 1. On the hypothesis of a cult of Zeus Meilichios
    undertaken by *genoi* or *patriai* (birth or caste groups), see
    <span class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, col.
    403–5; and A. Brugnone, cited in n. 21 above.

    Pausanias also mentions, along the sacred road to Eleusis, an altar
    of Zeus Meilichios where Theseus is said to have purified himself
    after killing his cousin Sinis in the course of his adventures
    (Pausanias 1.37.4). Sanctuaries dedicated to the purifying god were
    always situated near burial areas, as was the case in Selinunte; see
    <span class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, coll.
    403–5; for the cult of Zeus Meilichios, see <span
    class="smcaps">Zuntz</span> 1971, pp. 101–4; G.
    Sfameni Gasparro, “Politica, religione e culti,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Lo stile severo</span>* 1990, pp.
    43–54; G. Manganaro, “Mondo religioso greco e mondo indigeno in
    Sicilia,” in <span class="smcaps">Antonetti</span>
    1997, pp. 71–82. See N. Cusumano, “Zeus Meilichios,” *Mythos* 3
    (1991**)**, pp. 19–47; the author, after examining the evidence on
    the cult of Zeus Meilichios in the various areas of Greece and the
    Greek colonies, conjectured that a *genos* (descent, stock) or a
    *thiasos* (cult retinue) could procure a sacralized space in the
    rock for its purposes, carve a niche in it, and in that niche
    inscribe a dedication, as seen, for instance, in Thera and Cyrene.
    If that were the case, it is possible that the current relief might
    have enjoyed a similar placement in the Meilichios sanctuary at
    Selinunte.

[^25]: See C. Marconi, “Due studi sulle metope figurate dei templi C e F
    di Selinunte,” *RivIstArch* 18 (1995), pp. 5–67; <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 1997, pp. 121–34;
    and <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2006, pp.
    621–30.

[^26]: For ties between Nisaean Megara and Argos, see K. Hanell,
    *Megarische Studien* (Lund, 1934); and <span
    class="smcaps">Piccirilli</span> 1975, pp. 86–90.

[^27]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 204–5; and
    <span class="smcaps">Cusumano</span> 1997–98; on
    the presence of Orestes in Sicily and Magna Graecia, see also G.
    Camassa, “I culti dell’area dello stretto,” in *Lo* *Stretto
    crocevia di culture*, *AttiTaranto 26, 1986* (Taranto, 1987), pp.
    133–62; A. Coppola, *Archaiologhía e propaganda* (Rome 1995), pp.
    161–73; see also the exegesis of the *pinakes* from Francavilla di
    Sicilia assignable to types IX and XI, interpreted as Orestes and
    Iphigenia, in U. Spigo, “I pinakes di Francavilla di Sicilia: Nuova
    classificazione e brevi note sugli aspetti cultuali,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Damarato</span>* 2000, pp. 208–20,
    esp. pp. 213–14.

[^28]: For the role played by Apollo within family relationships, see
    <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 1997, pp.
    131–33.

[^29]: Hesiod, *Catalogue of Women* fr. 23a M-W. In this context, see
    the analysis and the hypothesis of recontextualization of several
    fragments from a figured white-ground lekythos with a scene of the
    sacrifice of Iphigenia found in the area of the Malophoros Sanctuary
    in Selinunte: C. Marconi, “Iphigenia a Selinunte,” *Prospettiva*
    75–76 (1994), pp. 50–54. For the account of Stesichorus, see M.
    Davies, *Poetarum melicorum Graecorum fragmenta* (Oxford, 1991),
    vol. 1, frag. 215. For the presence of Iphigenia in Megara, see
    <span class="smcaps">Piccirilli</span> 1975,
    frag.15.

[^30]: For the enclosure of Hekate, identified in some cases as the
    “Pasikrateia” mentioned in the inscription of Temple G (*IG* XIV
    268), see <span class="smcaps">Gabrici</span>
    1927, coll. 73–75; and <span
    class="smcaps">Dewailly</span> 1992, pp. 146–48.

[^31]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Curti and Van Bremen</span> 1999*,*
    p. 24.

[^32]: See Pausanias 1.43.1; K. Hanell, *Megarische Studien* (Lund,
    1934), p. 97; <span
    class="smcaps">Piccirilli</span> 1975, pp. 117–19.

[^33]: On the relations between the homeland and the colonies regarding
    the cults, see <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span>
    2007, pp. 204–5. For the presence of the sanctuary of Demeter
    Malophoros in Nisaean Megara, see Pausanias 1.44.3; C. Antonetti,
    “Megara e le sue colonie: un’unità storico-culturale?” in <span
    class="smcaps">Antonetti</span> 1997, pp. 83–94;
    and L. Pareti, “Per una storia dei culti della Sicilia antica:
    Selinunte e Megara Iblea,” in his *Studi siciliani ed italioti*
    (Florence, 1920), pp. 227–72.

[^34]: See the observations in A. F. Stewart, *Greek Sculpture: An
    Exploration* (London, 1990), pp. 115–16, and in <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2009, pp. 193–96,
    for a small Late Archaic relief from Selinunte in which the heads of
    the two figures are still frontal.

[^35]: See also the high-relief Archaic female figure from the *temenos*
    of Hekate in the Malophoros Sanctuary, turned for a three-quarters
    view: <span class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927*,*
    col. 91, pl. XXXI, no. 4. For the theme of the frontal face adopted
    in the Selinunte sculpture, which seems more connected to visual
    strategies than to chronological assessments, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2009, pp. 217–22.

[^36]: For this aspect in terracottas, see also the massive legs of the
    male figure in the *arula* from Monte San Mauro, with sow and
    piglets, in <span class="smcaps">Lentini</span>
    1993, pp. 127–28, no. 32.

[^37]: <span class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1987, pp.
    133–35, emphasizes the tendency both in stone sculpture and in
    terracotta to work the eyes as globular forms without details. For
    the relations between coroplastic production and sculpture in
    Selinunte, see E. Paribeni, “Profilo storico-critico delle sculture
    selinuntine,”in <span class="smcaps">Tusa</span>
    1984, pp. 26–31; <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 1994, pp. 215–19;
    and <span class="smcaps">Pecoraro</span> 2001,
    which emphasizes an intentional incorporation, in certain *arulae*
    of the Malophoros sanctuary, of the iconographic themes of the small
    metopes. It may be that large-production terracottas can also
    provide significant evidence relative to phenomena of cultural
    conservatism and iconographic persistence, which are so
    characteristic of the artistic models used in the western Greek
    cities; an overall analysis of the reliefs and *arulae* from
    Malophoros and a general reconsideration of the sanctuary, with a
    broader view of its contextual and cult milieu, could test this
    hypothesis. More recently, consider the observations in <span
    class="smcaps">Pautasso</span> 2012.

[^38]: For the stylistic problem of Temple C, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, pp. 176–84;
    for the small metopes, pp. 99–104. Tubular arms also characterize
    the winged figure in an Archaic metope, possibly from Gela; see
    <span class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen</span> 1992,
    pp. 24–25, no. 1.

[^39]: See <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007,
    pp. 122–24. The same globular definition of the eyes can be found in
    the figures of Temple C; see, for instance, the female figure in the
    fragmentary metope in <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, p. 136, fig.
    166. Similar characteristics are also found in other terracotta
    reliefs, such as the head, again from the Malophoros sanctuary, in
    <span class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927*,* pp.
    190–91, pl. XXX, no. 1, and a female figure, pl. XXXI, no. 3,
    especially for the rendering of the ears and the curls on the
    forehead. The mouth of Clytemnestra, with small, fleshy, horizontal
    lips, does not present the Archaic smile and seems like a distant
    heritage of the sub-Daedalic tradition, but the face, inscribed in
    an oval, belongs to the realm of Archaic sculpture; for this aspect,
    see G. Vallet and F. Villard, “Mégara Hyblaea: VIII: Remarques sur
    la plastique du VII siècle,” *MÉFRA* 76 (1964), pp. 25–42.

[^40]: For the rendering of the locks of hair at Selinunte, see the
    relief from the Casa del Viaggiatore in R. Camerata Scovazzo,
    “Soprintendenza Beni Culturali e Ambientali: Sezione per i Beni
    archeologici—Trapani: Aggiornamento attività 1988/1992,” *Kokalos*
    39–40 (1993–94), vol. II.2, pp. 1423–1456, esp. pp. 1436–40, pl.
    CCX*.* For the Quadriga metope, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2007, fig. 45.
    Orestes’ hair is modeled the same way as that of the male figure in
    the Malophoros relief; see <span
    class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927, pl. XXXI, no.
    4. For comparisons with small bronzes, see the hairstyle of the
    bronze Siren from Edifice B of the sanctuary at Capo Colonna in
    Crotone, datable to just after the middle of the sixth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, which has been
    identified as a Corinthian production influenced by Laconian
    prototypes: see R. Spadea, “Oggetti figurati in bronzo,” in R. Belli
    Pasqua and R. Spadea, eds., *Kroton e il suo territorio tra VI e V
    secolo a.C.: Aggiornamenti e nuove ricerche: Atti del Convegno di
    studi, Crotone, 3–5 marzo 2000* (Crotone, 2005), pp. 25–41; and
    <span class="smcaps">Stibbe</span> 2001, fig. 7.

[^41]: The cultural context is described by M. Torelli, “La cultura
    artistica dell’età arcaica,” in R. Bianchi Bandinelli, *Storia e
    civiltà dei Greci*, vol. 2 (Milan, 1979), pp. 688–720. On the
    importation into the west of Peloponnesian metal artifacts, see
    <span class="smcaps">Gabrici</span> 1927*,* col.
    346*–*47, fig. 145; see also <span
    class="smcaps">Belvedere</span> 1982, pp. 88–89,
    n. 110.

[^42]: C. M. Stibbe, *The Sons of Hephaistos: Aspects of the Archaic
    Greek Bronze Industry* (Rome, 2000), pp. 122–27, figs. 80–82.

[^43]: On the Corinthian influence on Sicilian and Selinuntine
    sculpture, see <span class="smcaps">Marconi</span>
    2007, pp. 176–84; U. Spigo*,* “Corinto e la Sicilia: Gli influssi
    dell’arte corinzia nella cultura figurativa dell’arcaismo siceliota:
    Alcuni aspetti,” in *Corinto e l’Occidente*, *AttiTaranto 34, 1994*
    (Taranto, 1995), pp. 551–83, esp. pp. *5*66*–*69; <span
    class="smcaps">Stibbe</span> 2001, pp. 27–28;
    <span class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1982, pp. 15–16;
    and <span class="smcaps">Pautasso</span> 2012.

[^44]: On Aegean influences on the plastic arts of Selinunte in the
    middle of the sixth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, see <span
    class="smcaps">Østby</span> 1987, pp. 127–28. For
    the role and influence of the Samians in Sicily, <span
    class="smcaps">Rolley</span> 1994–99, vol. 1, pp.
    299–300. See also F. Croissant, “La diffusione dei modelli
    stilistici greco-orientali nella coroplastica arcaica della Grecia
    d’Occidente,” in *Magna Grecia e oriente mediterraneo prima dell’età
    ellenistica, AttiTaranto 39, 1999* (Taranto, 2000), pp. 417–55. The
    elongation of the figures is also present in the Archaic Laconian
    plastic arts in which Eastern influences can be detected; see P. G.
    Guzzo, “Gioie clandestine,” *RM* (1987), pp. 162–81, fig. 1.

[^45]: For this aspect, see <span
    class="smcaps">Marconi</span> 2009, pp. 195–99,
    and C. Antonetti, “Megara e le sue colonie: un’unità
    storico-culturale?,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Antonetti</span> 1997, pp. 83–94.
    For more on relations in general between the colonial experience and
    the mother cities, see M. C. Parra, “L’arte greca in Italia
    meridionale, tra scoperte, riscoperte, ricezione,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Catoni and Settis</span> 2008, pp.
    79–91; and P. Orlandini, “L’arte in Magna Grecia e in Sicilia:
    Aspetti e problemi,” in *Les Grecs et l’Occident*: *Actes du
    colloque de la Villa ‘Kerylos’ (1991)*, Collection de l’École
    Française de Rome 208 (Paris, 1995), pp. 123–39.
