---
title: Group of a Seated Poet (Orpheus?) and Sirens
group: Group of a Seated Poet and Sirens
objects: !ruby/range 1..3
layout: false
---
#### Group of a Seated Poet (Orpheus?) and Sirens (cat. 1–3)

<h6 class="discussion-note">This discussion is reproduced on each of the individual object pages</h6>

An investigation conducted with endoscopic instruments revealed a great
deal about the execution of this sculptural group.[^1] The figures must
have been the product of a complex process of modeling. One possible
hypothesis is that some parts of the group could have been made by hand
and then assembled around supports or an armature, most likely made of
wood, which kept the fresh clay from collapsing.[^2] The system of
internal supports was used to establish the overall structural integrity
of the finished statue and might also have extended toward the exterior
for certain parts, such as the Sirens’ tails, Orpheus’s arms, the arms
of Siren B, and the seat of the *klismos*. It is likely that, as was
frequently done in antiquity, several parts, such as the head, arms, and
legs, were molded separately, with individual components then dovetailed
together or affixed by either the barbotine method, before firing, or
using additional mortar. This procedure not only facilitated the working
process but also reduced the risk of breakage during firing.[^3] Working
from the bottom up, artists likely constructed the rough figure around
the framework, over which the various parts were modeled. The drapery
and a number of elements on the short chitons worn by the Sirens—such as
the sash around the waist and the shoulder straps—were made with strips
of clay applied to the figure and then carefully shaped and worked with
special tools. This is documented by marks left where the shoulder strap
detached from the right shoulder of the pensive Siren A. A molded head
was then added to the body. X-radiographs of the figures show that the
head was inserted deeply into a cavity in the body and that the hands
are hollow up to the point where the fingers were attached. The breasts,
too, are hollow and were modeled from within. Perhaps the Sirens’
framework might have consisted of a vertical structure that held the
figures upright while work was proceeding. The framework for Orpheus, on
the other hand, was probably a support that roughly approximated the
form of the chair, around which the various parts were shaped and
assembled. Then the mass of the body was modeled up to the neck and
shoulders, possibly continuing to follow the guide of the internal
support. The legs, which were propped against the front face of the
*klismos,* must also have been modeled by hand and, despite the fact
that they were to be covered by drapery, they were modeled as far up as
the thighs. This manner of working made it possible to achieve a more
consistent treatment of movement and a more organic relationship between
the figure and the drapery, which was shaped over the structure of the
body. When examining the interior of the Orpheus figure, one sees that
in the area around the chair seat, where the mass of the body rested,
the sculptor created a series of small cavities, probably to accommodate
the structural supports. These served to reinforce a section that was
evidently considered to be especially fragile. Likewise, on the interior
of the rocky bases on which the Sirens are perched, it is possible to
see evidence of reinforcements arranged around the central cavity.

A subsequent phase focused on working in the iconographic details, such
as the plectrum, the kithara, the hair, and the ears, which are
perforated, as is the mouth. The facial features were defined before the
firing. Next came retouching with pointed tools when the clay was in a
leathery state, followed by firing.[^4] The surfaces of the statues were
covered by a white engobe slip; this strengthened and protected the
surfaces and provided a uniform preparation surface for the polychromy.
The white slip is well preserved at a number of points, and it renders
the exterior surface very smooth and purified in appearance.

This group constitutes one of the most unusual compositions in the art
of Magna Graecia. In the past, because of its uniqueness, the anomaly of
its iconography, and its purchase on the antiquities market, many
scholars believed it to be a forgery. Tests performed on the clay and
polychromy, however, have attested to its authenticity, though before
the Getty’s acquisition all the figures in the group had been subjected
to a substantial and in many respects inappropriate process of
restoration and cleaning that altered the surface and original
polychromy. Since the group had been acquired through the antiquities
market, there is no information about its place of discovery. It was
only through an exegetic and stylistic analysis that hypotheses could be
formulated as to its intended placement, significance, function, and
findspot.[^5]

The seated figure has been identified as Orpheus, the poet son of
Oeagrus (or Apollo) and the Muse Kalliope. He could charm humans and
subdue animals with his song. The shamanistic power of his art and its
ties to mystery religions constitute a central theme in the ancient
thought on and the iconography of the poet.[^6]

In the Classical period, Orpheus was portrayed as a beardless youth
playing a kithara or lyre, as in the Nekyia in the Lesche (council) of
the Knidians at Delphi, where Polygnotos painted him dressed in Greek
style beneath a willow tree and playing the lyre, surrounded by other
mythological characters.[^7]

In Attic red-figured vase-painting, in addition to images of the poet
among the Thracians, there are also depictions of his murder at the
hands of the Thracian women and the episode in which his head continues
to sing and prophesy even after being severed from his body. Orpheus
among the Thracians is depicted with a mantle wrapped around his hips or
dressed in a rich Eastern costume, an identifying feature as well as a
sign of ethnic affiliation that is found especially in the subsequent
repertory of Apulian vase-painting.[^8]

The Getty character’s seated position, the presence of the *klismos,*
and the mantle that softly envelopes his figure, leaving his torso
partly uncovered, are also distinctive features of the iconography of
poets and philosophers. Such figures were sometimes accompanied by a
*volumen* (papyrus scroll), in keeping with an iconographic scheme that
was formulated as early as the fifth century BC, but which was more
widely adopted beginning in the second half of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^9]

One slightly later comparison for this statue is a sculpture portraying
Pindar, found in the so-called Exedra of the Philosophers in the
Serapeion (Serapeum) of Memphis at Saqqara, built in the third century
<span class="smcaps">BC</span> and linked to a
Dionysian cult. In that statue, the poet is seated on a *klismos* and
partly covered by his mantle as he plays the kithara.[^10] The same
iconographic scheme is adopted for the type of the Apollo Kitharoidos,
as documented in vase paintings and statuary. In this scheme, the seated
deity almost always wears a mantle draped over his left shoulder and has
an elaborate hairstyle. In the case of the Getty Orpheus, the head shows
traces of pigments, but that does not rule out the possibility that
there was once a headdress or hairdo that extended over the
hairline.[^11]

The *klismos*, which is especially well represented in works of the
Hellenistic period, is an element that would appear to identify the
social status and intellectual gifts of the character who was being
depicted in the role of Orpheus, as was also typical in the Attic
repertory.[^12]

In the context of Magna Graecia, it is difficult to establish close
comparisons. Apulian red-figured vases provide extensive documentation
of Orpheus’s chthonic role, with painters often choosing to depict the
episode of the *katabasis,* or descent to the Underworld, rather than
other events in his mythology. This episode is featured in a group of
Apulian vases decorated with scenes from the afterlife that has been
extensively studied. In these vases Orpheus is the principal character,
standing in the presence of Hades and Persephone, often close to or
inside a *naiskos* (small temple), which could be interpreted as a
synecdoche for the Palace of Hades. He is surrounded by inhabitants of
the Underworld, such as Sisyphus, Cerberus, or the Furies, or next to a
deceased person holding a scroll; the scroll may be an allusion to the
religious text that accompanies him into the Underworld, as attested,
for instance, on the amphora by the Ganymede Painter in Basel. With the
sound of his kithara, an attribute that appears in all of these scenes,
it would seem that Orpheus saves the initiate from the demons of Hades
by showing him the path of salvation.[^13]

The Getty figure, seated and in all likelihood once holding a stringed
instrument (now lost), evokes other iconographies of the intellectual
milieu but not specifically linked to Orpheus. In fact, this figure does
not wear the elaborate Eastern costume with Phrygian cap that usually
identifies the poet in Hades in Apulian vase-painting. All the same,
there are some, albeit few, Apulian vases in which Orpheus or a figure
very like him does appear wearing a simple mantle and holding a kithara,
though the absence of any explicative inscriptions leaves a margin of
doubt as to his identity.[^14]

In light of a preliminary analysis, it is possible to propose that this
statue is not a depiction of Orpheus but rather a portrayal of a
deceased individual depicted with a number of elements linked to the
mythical milieu of Orpheus. These elements include the stringed
instrument, used to emphasize the lyrical and poetic context of the
poet-intellectual; and the presence of the Sirens, with their clear
funerary references.

Orpheus’s connection with the world of the dead would have been well
known to any contemporary who viewed this group of figures. Through the
shamanistic power of his art, Orpheus had succeeded not only in subduing
the forces of the afterlife but also restoring souls to the world of the
living. This achievement is narrated in the renowned episode in which he
nearly rescues his bride, Eurydike, from the Underworld. In it he takes
on the role of intermediary between the world of mortals and that of the
afterlife, serving also as a guarantor of the rites of purification
required in the Underworld.

The chthonic connection of this group is emphasized by the presence of
the two Sirens standing on bases, which, with their rocky appearance,
clearly allude to the Sirens’ origin as demons linked to the marine
world. The two figures are imagined in an outdoor setting, as suggested
by the movement of the folds on the sides of their short chitons,
evoking gusts of sea breeze. Of the two figures, one is characterized by
a melancholy, pensive expression, while the other, her arms flexing
upward, is caught in a pose that seems to allude to song.[^15]

The archaeological and literary evidence provides for the Siren a
complex profile and a number of different aspects, both positive and
negative, that while chiefly linked to the enchantment of music and
poetry, are also tied to erotic seduction and nature’s life force. Yet
the funerary nature of these creatures, who are evoked in many literary
sources in the context of mourning, seems to be their prevalent trait.
In Euripides’ *Helen* (169–75), for example, the Sirens, companions of
Persephone in Hades, are invoked and urged to accompany funerary
lamentations with their lyres.[^16] In funerary contexts, the Sirens
assume expressive poses and gestures linked to lamentation, in some
cases accompanying their laments with the sound of the kithara and the
aulos. That is how they are presented, as early as the late fifth
century, on a number of Attic funerary stelae. This iconography was to
persist throughout the Hellenistic period in various parts of Greece,
where Sirens appeared, in pairs, on funerary monuments of prominent
women or illustrious men endowed with intellectual virtues. One such
example is the famed tomb of Sophocles; another is the tomb of the
Sophist Isocrates. In both tombs, the Sirens’ special relationship with
poets and orators is emphasized.[^17]

In many funerary stelae of the fourth and third centuries <span
class="smcaps">BC,</span> Sirens appear, invariably in
pairs, posed symmetrically at either extremity of the slab, supporting
the inscription with the name of the deceased. In some cases, they are
shown with their hands on their heads or holding stringed
instruments.[^18]

The Sirens also served as decorative motifs on the capitals of funerary
monuments in the area of Taranto between the end of the fourth century
and the first half of the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC;</span> they were often depicted
with one arm tucked under the breasts and a hand supporting the inclined
head in a pose commonly used to indicate melancholy, like that of Siren
A in the Getty group.[^19]

Sirens were portrayed in the Archaic period with birds’ bodies and
women’s heads; such was the case in Corinthian vase-painting, where they
were a recurring motif in animal friezes. In Attic vase-painting, by
contrast, they were portrayed as protagonists of the Homeric narrative,
or else as musicians, as witnesses of heroic deeds, or in scenes of
funerary mourning and lamentation. Beginning in the Classical period,
they underwent a progressive and radical humanization, as did other
mythological figures such as the Gorgon. Over the course of the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, in fact, the
Sirens would gradually take on a female appearance in the entire upper
half of the body, as is documented with crude realism in the
above-mentioned funerary stelae and, in the context of Magna Graecia, in
images painted on South Italian vases and in the coroplastic art.[^20]
In the previously mentioned Exedra of the Philosophers in the Serapeion
of Saqqara, alongside figures of poets and intellectuals, there was also
a pair of standing Sirens, each with bird claws and a humanized bust,
wearing melancholy expressions, their heads tilted to one side, and
small kitharas in their arms.[^21]

Thus the Sirens are, in general terms, figures that foreshadow death and
accompany the dead into the Underworld. Their role as psychopomp was
already suggested in the Archaic period by *askoi* (wine vessels) in the
form of Sirens, used primarily for funerary purposes.[^22] In order to
reconstruct the function of the Sirens within the Getty group, however,
a more precise interpretation of their iconography and possible semantic
values must be sought.

One of the primary activities of Sirens, attested by both the pose of
Siren B and a copious literary tradition, is singing in an insidiously
seductive manner. Their singing could prove fatal to those caught
unawares, those who tended to follow their instincts and the allure of
the senses. As mentioned above, the Sirens’ song in the Homeric
tradition is linked to an ambiguous persuasive power; they are liminal
creatures between the past and the future, between earth and the gates
of Hades, set in a flowering meadow scattered with human bones. They
promise a broad body of knowledge but a deceptive one, as men are lured
toward another world that coincides with death. In this context, only a
wise man or someone who can summon the forces of reason and thought
might hope to pass their terrible test, as the Homeric story makes
clear. The redeeming lesson is that only the initiate who attains wisdom
through concerted intellectual and ethical striving can aspire to
overcome the human condition of suffering and to achieve
immortality.[^23]

The Siren represents this challenge—a crucial aspect of the relationship
between Orpheus and the Sirens, and a necessary step in the attainment
of wisdom and knowledge—and also our natural fear of death and the
unknown, the otherness that extends beyond the limits of humanity.[^24]

If the central character in the Getty group represents a deceased person
who has been assimilated to the wise or skilled Orpheus, the two Sirens
would find a consistent placement beside him and be assimilated with him
*sub specie aeternitatis.* With the harmonious sounds of his musical
instrument, he can not only triumph over wild creatures of an ambiguous
nature but also, through the wisdom or skill and harmony evoked by the
sound of the kithara, he can successfully face the final voyage and
achieve eternal salvation. In this context, the depiction of the Sirens
in an outdoor setting, perched on rocks, harks back to literary
tradition and such works as the *Argonautica* of Apollonios of Rhodes,
where in the contest between Orpheus and the Sirens there is an emphasis
on an opposition between harmful and beneficial music.[^25]

The Getty group would thus seem to evoke, in a fantastic and ideological
synthesis, the figure of an initiate of Orphism who, through the contest
and harmony of music and philosophical thought, has controlled the
emotional forces of instinct and resisted the enticing song of Siren B.
Siren A, in her turn, seems to express the attainment of a new
condition, identifying an eschatological prospect for the man.[^26]
Substantial ambivalence characterizes both creatures.

It is worthwhile to consider the hypothesis that the Sirens could be an
expression of a positive tone, clearly present in the complex of Orphic
and Pythagorean beliefs. However, one should be wary of suggesting too
narrow a correlation between figures and philosophical ideas in a
sculptural group that lacks all context. Nevertheless, referencing
Apulian culture of the second half of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> is essential in proposing a
functional reconstruction of the group.

Music (*mousike*) and the study of harmony were central to Pythagorean
philosophy, which partly correlates with Orphism, a doctrine that was
followed in Taras (modern Taranto) by the circle of Archytas (fl. ca.
428–350 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>), but which, as
is extensively documented, was also widely popular in Magna Graecia
during the Hellenistic period. For instance, a series of metal lamellae
found in graves in Magna Graecia, Crete, and Thessaly are generally
interpreted as Orphic documents containing instructions on how to
successfully complete the journey to the Underworld.[^27] Although the
connections between Orphism and Pythagoreanism in the dynamic panorama
of the Hellenistic period are complex and problematic, one should keep
in mind that philosophical and religious doctrines could manifest within
various cultural and geographic milieux, in a network of interactions
and analogies that makes rigid classification difficult.

According to the philosophical beliefs of the Pythagoreans, the study of
music was fundamental to *paideia* (physical and mental training) and
*ethos* (guiding standards or ideals), the source of inspiration for
political behavior in the quest for *sophrosyne* (temperance) and
*eurhythmia* (harmonious bodily health). Likewise, the perfect harmony
and geometry of music, amplified in the vision of the cosmos, were
models for the creation of civil society. Harmony established the sense
of proportion and restraint, in opposition to excess and abuse of power.
Plato recognized in *mousike* an indispensable tool for the education of
the citizenry and the harmonizing of the civic spirit, because harmony
has “motions akin to the revolutions of our souls.”[^28] The political
value of musical education is a central concept in Plato’s *Laws* as
well, due to the shaping power that music has on the soul. The kithara
was considered an especially effective pedagogical instrument in this
context. In striving for a pure sound, the teacher was supposed to
ensure that the instrument’s sound was in unison with that of the voice.
Musical performance, moreover, demanded a complete involvement, inasmuch
as it was accompanied by recitation and bodily movement.[^29]

During the mid-fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, Taras, under the command of
Archytas, became the main center of Pythagorean philosophy and Orphism.
According to Aristoxenus, a musicologist and intellectual of the fourth
century BC, Archytas—philosopher, mathematician, and statesman—was an
ideal representative of the *bios pithagorikos*, in which “good music”
inspired a political practice that strove for a wise economic
equilibrium among the social classes, and in which philosophical
reflection and political practice enjoyed an optimal synthesis. The idea
of *apatheia*—which implies not the elimination of passions but rather
their moderation through the practice of virtue—is present in the
Platonic model and was later also expressed in *Peri nomo kai
dikaiosinas* (*On Law and Justice*), a treatise by Pseudo-Archytas.[^30]
It is intriguing to hypothesize that Siren A expresses the attainment of
*apatheia* in the moment of detachment from earthly experience and the
awareness acquired through the good music produced by the deceased
Orpheus, and that Siren B expresses musical and singing virtue that is
attained in harmony with the sound of the kithara. This interpretation
can be traced more precisely to Pythagorean thought, which viewed Sirens
as creatures linked to the transition from life to death but also as
privileged guardians of wisdom and guarantors of cosmic harmony. This
concept was borrowed by Plato as well; it is expressed in the myth of Er
in the tenth book of *The Republic,* in which he writes that the Sirens
coordinate the harmony of the celestial spheres. It is significant that
the central theme of this myth is precisely the individual liberty of
man in the choice between good and evil, the freedom to place oneself in
the realm of dispersal and oblivion or else to become first a
dialectical unit and then a “political being.”[^31]

While it has already been cautiously suggested that Archytas or someone
from his immediate circle was the likely recipient of the Getty group,
it should be considered that the work must have been commissioned by
someone of great influence living in Apulia during the first half of the
fourth century <span class="smcaps">BC:</span> someone
who was close to the Orphic milieu (though it would not be safe to
associate it with a specific context).[^32] As for the original purpose
of the group, a funerary placement seems most likely, considering the
previous iconographic analysis and the possible identification of the
male character as a deceased person. One hypothesis would place the
group inside a *naiskos* set atop a tomb. This would be in keeping with
a Tarentine architectural typology after the middle of the fourth
century BC, during a revival of more lavish funerary customs and a
return to the use of the chamber tomb. On large vases, probably used as
*semata* (tomb markers), there are depictions of *naiskoi* within which
appear individual characters and groups of figures, perhaps in imitation
of real statues. However, the funerary statues inside the *naiskoi*
tended to be made of limestone or marble rather than the less impressive
or durable terracotta.[^33] The reconstruction of *naiskoi* and their
architectural decoration remains somewhat problematic, for though a
large volume of *naiskos* architectural fragments have been recovered,
few have been found in their original locations; no *naiskos* has yet
been discovered on the spot where it originally fell, much less in situ.
Like the figures in the *naiskoi* on vases, the Getty group is
configured as a *mise-en-scène,* reflecting the status of the deceased
and probably forming part of a larger group. The use of *naiskoi* as
*semata*, augmented with modeled clay decorations, is also attested in
Greece as far back as the Archaic period, as Pausanias informs us.
Nonetheless, archaeological evidence does not allow a comparative
analysis between the types of funerary monuments mentioned by Pausanias
and the situation in Taras in the Late Classical and Hellenistic
periods. In Sparta as well there is documentation of many *heroa*
(shrines dedicated to heroes), also in connection with *leschai*;
funerary monuments comprising large numbers of votive statues have been
found, attesting to the prestige of certain families.[^34]

The presence in Taranto, in the area of the Fondo Giovinazzi, of a
*heroön* dedicated to Orpheus was at one point proposed, but it has been
repeatedly rebutted, in part because of the absence of literary
sources.[^35] An alternative hypothesis would place this group in a
chamber tomb, a type present in Taranto in the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> but widespread mainly in the
indigenous context, during the period coinciding with the rise of an
aristocratic class.[^36] This is also supported by a comparison with the
tombs of Canosa, which in the fourth to third centuries <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> featured terracotta statue
groups, probably arranged around the funerary *kline* or dining couch*,*
and by a chamber tomb in Cariati, in Calabria (Brettian territory),
dating from the last quarter of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC,</span> in which the grave goods
also included a life-size statue, of which only fragments have been
recovered.[^37]

It was in the indigenous population centers that Orphism and related
eschatological belief systems were common, as Paolo Orsi had already
suggested. This seems to be indicated by the fact that most of the
Apulian vases with depictions of Orpheus were found not in Taranto, but
in places such as Ruvo, Armento, Altamura, and Canosa, where they were
intended for an elite clientele.[^38] In connection with this
hypothesis, Angelo Bottini has analyzed the attestations of salvation
theology and has pointed out that beginning at least in the fifth
century BC, a rage for re-elaborated and diversified Orphic and
Pythagorean cults swept through the indigenous centers, especially among
the localities that were directly involved culturally and commercially
with the cities of Magna Graecia.[^39]

A third hypothesis is that the Getty group was created for a purely
religious context. The most pertinent point of reference, the Exedra of
the Poets and Philosophers in the Serapeion of Memphis, is however quite
difficult to imagine in Apulia or Taras, where the Orphic cults were
conducted in keeping with more secluded rituals. One must keep in mind
that, according to the literary sources, particularly Pausanias, there
were a number of sculptural groups depicting Orpheus, now lost, in
votive settings.[^40]

Stylistically, the figures in the Getty group have some of the formal
traits of late-fifth-century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> Tarentine plastic arts. These
are characterized by a fondness for fully rounded volumes; eyes with a
well shaped, symmetrical outline and distinctly modeled eyelids; fleshy
mouths; robust necks; heavy jaws; and solid cranial structures. Such
features can also be found in a number of Tarentine marble heads, mostly
from funerary statues datable to the end of the fifth century through
most of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> They are evidence of the
artists’ determination to preserve the most distinctive characteristics
of the local production, in which the iconographic types and the formal
traits of the Late-Classical Attic school can be clearly
identified.[^41]

The Orpheus figure, with his distinct features and the solid plasticity
of the face, seems to be reminiscent of such prototypes as the marble
head of Athena in Brescia, which is a copy of a Classical original
thought to have once formed part of the bronze sculptural group by
Phidias at Delphi. In addition, the head of the so-called Orpheus
recognizable in the basanite example at the Munich Glyptothek, an
Augustan copy of a Greek original dating from 460 BC (but assigned by
Paul Zanker and Brunilde Ridgway to the Late Hellenistic period), can be
compared to our male head.[^42]

The Getty Orpheus’s general aspect and facial features also recall the
acrolithic marble head of Apollo from the Temple of Apollo Alaios at
Cirò, datable to the same period (440–430 <span
class="smcaps">BC)</span>.[^43]

The Getty figure is closely comparable with a number of terracotta
pieces attributed to a coroplast or a circle of artists that has been
called the circle of the Master of the Singers of Taras, so named
because most of the figures seemingly produced by this workshop feature
a half-open mouth, as if they were in the act of singing. This workshop
is thought to have been active in the second half of the fourth century
<span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> The accuracy of the
individual details of these sculptures suggests that they used
first-generation molds inspired by works from the Classical period,
perhaps in bronze; this is indicated by certain technical and
iconographic traits, such as the type of finish and the shape of the
eyes with their lamellar eyelids, and the curve from the lip to the
teeth. The workshop is believed to have specialized in figures of
banqueters or poets associated with Orpheus. Many pieces can be linked
to this group; unfortunately most of them have been sold on the
antiquities market and thus dispersed. They depict male characters,
often wearing bands and caps typical of banqueters, or soft, pointed
caps reminiscent of the Phrygian cap of Orpheus. Though they differ in
dimensions and diverse iconographic details, these figures all feature
the same masculine type and physiognomic and technical details. It is
debatable whether they were the work of a single workshop. In any case,
they demonstrate not only the artistry of the coroplasts in Taranto, but
also of their technical prowess, such as the creation of a patrix
(pattern or die) or parallel patrices from which molds were produced and
reused, resulting in works diversified in type and iconography but
associated by a certain resemblance.[^44] It remains to be seen whether
the numerous Tarentine heads with half-open mouths depicted poets and
whether they can therefore be correlated with the figure of Orpheus or
with Orphic doctrines.

Outside of Taranto, the most interesting parallels in terracotta votive
busts come from Ariccia, which can probably also be traced back to
Tarentine workshops and dated to the end of the fourth century. These
works have affinities in formal elements: clear evidence of the
circulation in an Italic context of models that were also present in
Magna Graecia and Taranto.[^45]

In the absence of a documented findspot, the group can only be generally
dated to the last thirty years of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> based on style, iconography,
and the hypothetical connection with the cultural climate of Apulia in
the second half of fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> Interpretation based on
style alone may well be misleading, given the persistence of
Late-Classical traits even into the middle of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>.

### Appendix

Thermoluminescence of the clay body, X-ray fluorescence, polarized light
microscopy, and ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy analysis of the
polychromy were performed. They all attest to the group’s authenticity.

<br />
Results of the pigment analysis:  
<br />

#### Orpheus figure

1. **Yellow/gold:** yellow ocher, lead white, chalk
2. **Red:** yellow ocher, burnt sienna
3. **White ground:** chalk (or lead white)
4. **Pink:** cinnabar, lead white, chalk
5. **Red/brown:** iron earth red, chalk

#### Orpheus footstool

6. **Orange:** yellow ocher red ocher
7. **Black:** lampblack
8. **Pink:** red ocher, chalk

#### Notes

[^1]: See the report by the Antiquities Conservation Department in the
    appendix to this entry. Detached curls and other fragmentary
    elements of the group have the inventory numbers 76.AD.11.6 –
    76.AD.11.304.

[^2]: This modeling technique was also used in the Hellenistic period
    for statues in terracotta. See, for example, the female bust from
    Falerii (third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>) in the Musée du Louvre:
    F. Gaultier, “L’Ariadne de Faléries: Une chef-d’oeuvre retrouvé,” in
    *<span class="smcaps">Damarato* 2000</span>, pp.
    288–97. The technique was also used during the Renaissance and in
    modern times. On this, see M. G. Vaccari, ed., *La scultura in
    terracotta* (Florence, 1996), in particular the study by G.
    Gentilini, “La scultura fiorentina in terracotta del Rinascimento:
    Tecniche e tipologie,” pp. 64–103.

[^3]: The clearly visible line of the seam in Siren B’s left hand might
    show where the hand was attached to the arm. On “the technique of
    added pieces,” see <span
    class="smcaps">Tomei 1992</span>, pp. 176–77; this
    technique is well depicted in a *kylix* by the Foundry Painter in
    Berlin, q.v. *Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum*, Berlin Antiquarium 1, pl.
    72–73. With the terracotta fragments from the Palatine, thought to
    have been made from molds, the circular cavities found in them may
    have been made by a support used during the assembly phase. The same
    procedure was identified at Olympia, for instance, in the group of
    Zeus and Ganymede: see A. Moustaka*, Grossplastik aus Ton in
    Olympia*, Olympia Forschungen 22 (Berlin, 1993), pp. 64–97, pls.
    33–39.

[^4]: For the process of firing in separate parts and subsequent
    assembly, see also W. Deonna, *Les statues de terre cuite dans
    l’antiquité* (Paris, 1908), pp. 20–25.

[^5]: Suspicion of their authenticity has been heightened by the
    singular nature of some parts of the figures, such as the claws of
    the Sirens, which elude criteria of standardized production, and by
    the absence of comparisons for the figures as a group due to the
    rarity of non-architectural terracotta sculptural groups. The
    improper restoration and reckless cleaning done before the Getty
    purchased this group—exemplified by the application of artificial
    incrustations on some sections—has contributed to the anomalous
    appearance of the figures.

[^6]: For the genealogy and the iconography of Orpheus in general, see
    <span class="smcaps">Garezou</span> 1994.

[^7]: Pausanias’s apparent astonishment as he describes Orpheus’s Greek
    appearance can lead us to believe that he was more commonly depicted
    in Eastern dress. For a reconstruction of the painting by Polygnotos
    (Pausanias 10.30.6), see M. D. Stansbury O’Donnell, “Polygnotos’
    Nekyia: A Reconstruction and Analysis,” *AJA* 94 (1990), pp. 213–35.

[^8]: For the iconography of Orpheus in Attic vase-painting, see <span
    class="smcaps">Garezou 1994</span>, in particular
    nos. 7–14, 23–26 for Orpheus dressed in Greek style among the
    Thracians; no. 16 for Apulian vases, especially those produced
    between 340 and 310 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, in which Orpheus appears
    dressed in Greek style; and nos. 20–21, 72–84 for Orpheus in Hades,
    a theme treated almost exclusively in Apulian vase-painting.

[^9]: On this aspect, see R. Von den Hoff, *Philosophenporträts des
    Früh- und Hochhellenismus* (Munich, 1994), pp. 23–33; P. Zanker,
    *The Mask of Socrates: The Image of the Intellectual in Antiquity*
    (Berkeley, 1995), pp. 52–57, 113–22; J. J. Pollitt*, Art in the
    Hellenistic Age* (Cambridge, 1986), pp. 63–69. For examples of
    philosophers or poets in Greek portraiture, including the portrait
    of Euripides in the Louvre, probably derived from the statue erected
    in Athens by Lykourgos between 340 and 336 BC, see G. M. A. Richter,
    *The Portraits of the Greeks*, vol. 1 (London, 1965), pp. 137–39,
    figs. 760–61.

[^10]: <span class="smcaps">Lauer and Picard</span>
    1955, pp. 48–68. For a comparison with the statue of Pindar, see
    also <span class="smcaps">Bottini and Guzzo
    1993</span>, pp. 43–52, nn. 22 and 23.

[^11]: For Apollo Kitharoidos, see W. Lambrinoudakis and O. Palagia,
    s.v. “Apollon,” *LIMC* 2.1 (1984), pp. 199–213; <span
    class="smcaps">Flashar 1992</span>, pp. 114–23; D.
    Castaldo, *Il pantheon musicale: Iconografia nella ceramica attica
    tra VI e IV secolo a.C*. (Ravenna, 2000), pp. 15–22; for statuary,
    see M. Mertens-Horn, “La statua di Apollo citaredo della galleria
    delle statue nel Vaticano,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Castoldi</span> 1999*,* pp.
    323*–*42. For vase-painting, also consider the image of Apollo
    seated on the *klismos*, partly wrapped in a mantle, crowned with a
    laurel wreath, and playing the seven-string kithara, depicted on a
    vase by the Shuvalov Painter, from 435–425 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>: L. Massei, “Le ceramiche
    del pittore di Shuvalov rinvenute a Spina,” *MÉFRA* 85, no. 2
    (1973), pp. 437–81, fig. 10. For Apulian vases, see also the Apulian
    *pelike* (wide-mouthed jars) by the Chamay Painter, in which Apollo,
    seated and partly wrapped in a mantle, plucks a kithara, in D.
    Paquette, *L’instrument de musique dans la céramique de la Grèce
    antique* (Paris, 1984), C48 and C49. For numismatics, see the seated
    figure of Apollo playing the kithara on a coin from Metaponto
    (440–430 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>), in S. P.
    Noe, *The Coinage of Metapontum*, part 2 (New York, 1931), p. 96,
    no. 431. See also the head of the Apollo of Cirò in which hair,
    probably of metal leaf, was inserted, in <span
    class="smcaps">Settis and Parra 2005</span>, pp.
    259–62; M. Mertens-Horn, “Resti di due grandi statue di Apollo
    ritrovati nel santuario di Apollo Aleo di Cirò,” in <span
    class="smcaps">*Santuari della Magna Grecia in
    Calabria*</span> 1996*,* pp. 261–65.

[^12]: <span class="smcaps">Beschi 1991</span>, pp.
    39–55; for the *klismos* and the type of footstool, see G. M. A.
    Richter, *The Furniture of the Greeks, Etruscans and Romans*
    (London, 1966), pp. 37–38 and 49–52. A terracotta chair with a
    backrest topped by two winged creatures was discovered at Taranto in
    a tomb in the Via Argentina: see <span
    class="smcaps">De Juliis and Loiacono 1985</span>,
    p. 387, no. 475.

[^13]: For the iconography of Orpheus in Apulian vases, see M. Schmidt,
    “Orfeo e orfismo nella pittura vascolare italiota,” *<span
    class="smcaps">Orfismo in Magna Grecia</span>*
    1975, pp. 105–38, pl. VIII; see also <span
    class="smcaps">Pensa 1977</span>, pp. 23–31, pl.
    V, fig. 1, and pl. X.

[^14]: This imagery might derive from a pictorial prototype such as the
    renowned Nekyia by Nikias: see G. Becatti, s.v. “Nikias,” *<span
    class="smcaps">EAA</span>* 5 (1963), pp. 476–82.
    See the conclusions of <span
    class="smcaps">Bottini</span> 2000 and also <span
    class="smcaps">Pensa 1977</span>, pp. 46–47, no.
    146, pls. VII and IX for two volute kraters, one from Armento, now
    in the Museo Archeologico Nazionale in Naples, the other of an
    unknown findspot, now at the Hermitage in St. Petersburg, in which
    the poet is depicted as a youth wearing a mantle and holding a
    kithara.

[^15]: For a general treatment of the iconography of the Sirens in
    chthonic contexts, see <span
    class="smcaps">Hofstetter</span> 1997.

[^16]: In *Andromache* by Euripides (936), the expression “Sirens’
    words” is used pejoratively, while in *Alexandra* by
    Pseudo-Lycophron (714–27), phonosymbolic effects are also used to
    reproduce the allure and seductive power of their song. As early as
    the seventh century <span
    class="smcaps">BC,</span> the poet Alcman placed
    the Muses and the Sirens on an equal plane in terms of their musical
    abilities: *Greek Lyric*, vol. 2, trans. D. A. Campbell (Cambridge
    and London, 1988), pp. 418–19, no. 30.

[^17]: On the presence of Sirens on funerary monuments in general, see
    <span class="smcaps">Hofstetter-Dolega</span>
    1990, pp. 151–83; on the funerary monuments of Sophocles and
    Isocrates in particular, see pp. 26–28. For the Sirens in the
    Serapeion of Memphis at Saqqara, see <span
    class="smcaps">Hofstetter 1997</span>, no. 88. For
    funerary statues of Sirens from the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, from the Kerameikos
    cemetery in Athens, see S. Karouzou, *National Archaeological
    Museum: Collection of Sculpture* (Athens, 1968), p. 106, no. 2583
    and p. 122, nos. 193 and 775. Sirens also appear in Attic funerary
    stelae; see examples in M. Comstock and C. C. Vermeule, *Sculpture
    in Stone: The Greek, Roman and Etruscan Collection of the Museum of
    Fine Arts, Boston* (Boston, 1976), nos. 66, 67, 72. On the presence
    of Sirens performing music in funerary contexts, see <span
    class="smcaps">Beschi 1991</span>, p. 40. Also
    <span class="smcaps">Leclercq-Marx 1997</span>,
    pp. 36–40; <span
    class="smcaps">Woysch-Méautis 1982</span>, pp.
    91–99.

[^18]: P. M. Fraser and T. Rönne, *Boeotian and West Greek Tombstones*
    (Lund, 1957), pp. 191–94, pl. 31, nos. 2–3 from Apollonia, pls. 7–10
    from Thebes. See also the examples of the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC:</span> pl. 25, no. 5; pls.
    26–27. For the pose, see the funerary statue depicting a female
    figure from Taranto, datable to the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC,</span> see <span
    class="smcaps">De Juliis and Loiacono 1985</span>,
    p. 104, no. 85.

[^19]: See the examples of capitals in <span
    class="smcaps">Wuilleumier 1939</span>, pls. 1–3;
    the weeping Siren in a limestone capital datable to 300–250 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> in C. C. Vermeule,
    *Sculpture in Stone and in Bronze: Additions to the Collections of
    Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Art, 1971–1988,* *in the Museum of Fine
    Arts, Boston* (Boston, 1988), p. 26, no. 15; and the Siren in a
    capital from Taranto (inv. 96.AA.245) at the J. Paul Getty Museum,
    possibly originally from a *naiskos* and datable to about 330 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>: <span
    class="smcaps">Grossman 2001</span>, no. 55, pp.
    146–47.

[^20]: On the humanized image of the Siren see, for Southern Italy, the
    Apulian volute-krater from 330–320 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> in <span
    class="smcaps">Hofstetter 1997</span>, no. 45; a
    Campanian *hydria* with Siren with long bird claws in A. D.
    Trendall, *The* *Red-Figured Vases of Lucania, Campania, and Sicily*
    (Oxford, 1967), p. 376, no. 121; the Apulian *loutrophoros* at the
    J. Paul Getty Museum by the Painter of Louvre MNB 1148 (inv.
    86.AE.680), in D. Tsiafakis, “Life and Death at the Hands of a
    Siren,” *Studia Varia from the J. Paul Getty Museum* 2 (2001), pp.
    7–24, fig. 4. For examples in terracotta, see the statuette of a
    Siren dated around ca. 460 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> said to have found in the
    region of Taranto: K. Deppert, “Jahres-berichte Kestner Museum
    1973–1976,” *Hannoversche* *Geschichtsblätter* 30 (1976), pp.
    287–89, no. 18; see also from Myrina the statuette of a Siren with a
    bust of a woman in <span
    class="smcaps">Breitenstein 1941</span>, pl. 58,
    nos. 463–64; and examples in <span
    class="smcaps">Besques 1963</span>, pl. 92, dated
    from the end of the third century BC.<span
    class="smcaps">.</span>

[^21]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Lauer and Picard 1955</span>, pp.
    216–27.

[^22]: For the function of the psychopomp, see L. Breglia Pulci Doria,
    “Immagini di Sirene nella Crotoniatide,” in <span
    class="smcaps">*Santuari della Magna Grecia in
    Calabria* 1996</span>, pp. 239–40.

[^23]: <span class="smcaps">Breglia Pulci Doria</span>
    1987, p. 43; L. Breglia Pulci Doria, “Le Sirene, il confine,
    l’aldilà,” in *Mélanges Pierre Lévêque* 4 (Paris, 1990), pp. 63–78.

[^24]: On this interpretation consider the review by F. Gilotta of <span
    class="smcaps">Hofstetter-Dolega</span> 1990 in
    *Prospettiva* 67 (1992), pp. 83–85; also <span
    class="smcaps">Giangiulio 1986</span>, pp. 101–54;
    and B. D’Agostino, “Le Sirene, il tuffatore e le porte dell’Ade,”
    *AION* 4 (1982), pp. 43–56.

[^25]: G. Iacobacci, “Orfeo argonauta: Apollonio Rodio I,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Masaracchia 1993</span>, pp. 77–92.
    Compare the analysis in M. L. West, *The Orphic Poems* (Oxford,
    1983), pp. 25–26, 29–33.

[^26]: For this interpretation, see <span
    class="smcaps">Bottini 2000</span>, pp. 136–37.

[^27]: For Orphism in general, see the bibliography in <span
    class="smcaps">Tra Orfeo e Pitagora</span> 2000;
    for the complex issue of relations between Orphism and
    Pythagoreanism and for Plato’s view on Orphic thought, see M.
    Tortorelli Ghidini, “Da Orfeo agli orfici,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Tra Orfeo e Pitagora 2000</span>,
    pp. 11–41; also P. Bourgeaud, ed., *Orphisme et Orphée, en l’honneur
    de Jean Rudhardt* (Geneva, 1991); W. K. C. Guthrie, *Orpheus and
    Greek Religion* (Princeton, 1993). For the Orphic laminae, see G.
    Pugliese Carratelli, *Le lamine d’oro orfiche* (Milan, 2001); and
    idem, “L’orfismo in Magna Grecia,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Pugliese Carratelli 1988</span>,
    pp. 159–70, with previous bibliography.

[^28]: *Timaeus* 47d; see also *Republic* 2.376e.

[^29]: Plato, *Laws* 7.812 and *Republic* 3.398–400. On the value of
    music in the context of Orphic and Pythagorean theories, see L.
    Beschi, “La prospettiva mitica della musica greca,” in *Religion,
    Mythologie, Iconographie*, ed. L. Kahil, *MÉFRA* 103, no. 1 (1991),
    pp. 39–43; and L. E. Rossi, “Musica e psicologia nel mondo antico e
    nel mondo moderno,” in *Synaulia: Cultura musicale in Grecia e
    contatti mediterranei*, ed. D. Musti, A. C. Cassio, and L. E. Rossi,
    *AION* 5 (2000), pp. 105–10. See also F. Cordano, “La città di
    Camarina e le corde della lira,” *PdP* 49 **(**1994), pp. 418–26; L.
    Todisco, “Nuovi dati e osservazioni sulla tomba delle danzatrici di
    Ruvo,” *AttiMGrecia* 3, n.s. (1994–95), p. 135, n. 96; G. Pugliese
    Carratelli, “L’orfismo in Magna Grecia,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Pugliese Carratelli</span> 1988*,*
    pp. 159–70.

[^30]: Although the text itself is problematic, it contains a number of
    elements that can be linked to the activity of Archytas. See A.
    Visconti, “Musica e attività politica in Aristosseno di Taranto,” in
    <span class="smcaps">Tra Orfeo e Pitagora</span>
    2000, pp. 463–85; for the pseudo-Archytan Pythagorean treatises, see
    also B. Centrone, “Il *perì nomo kai dikaiosinas* di Pseudo
    Archita,” <span class="smcaps">Tra Orfeo e
    Pitagora</span> 2000*,* pp. 487–505; also A. Mele, “I pitagorici e
    Archita,” in *Storia della Società Italiana* 1 (Milan, 1981), pp.
    269–98; A. Barker, “Archita di Taranto e l’armonia pitagorica,” in
    *Tra Sicilia e Magna Grecia: Aspetti di interazione culturale nel IV
    secolo a.C.*, *Atti del Convegno, Napoli 1987*, ed. A. Cassio and D.
    Musti (Naples, 1991), pp. 157–78; F. Cordano, “Sui frammenti poetici
    attribuiti ad Archita in Stobeo,” *PdP* 26 (1971), pp. 299–300.

[^31]: Plato, *Republic* 10.614–621; <span
    class="smcaps">Breglia Pulci Doria 1987</span>, p.
    43; for the Sirens and the cosmic music linked to them, see W.
    Burkert, *Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism* (Cambridge,
    Mass., 1972), pp. 350–68; also <span
    class="smcaps">Giangiulio 1986</span>, pp. 101–54.

[^32]: For the group and the figure of Archytas, see P. G. Guzzo, “Altre
    note tarantine,” *Taras* 12, no. 1 (1992), pp. 135–41. For the
    political career and the death of Archytas, see G. Urso, “La morte
    di Archita e l’alleanza fra Taranto e Archidamo di Sparta (345 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>),” *Aevum* 71 (1997), pp.
    63–70.

[^33]: For *naiskoi* in the context of necropoleis of Taranto, see A.
    Pontrandolfo, “Semata e naiskoi nella ceramica italiota,” *AION* 10
    (1988), pp. 181–202; for the relationship between iconography in
    vase-painting and archaeological reality, see <span
    class="smcaps">Lippolis 1994</span>, pp. 109–28,
    and E. Lippolis, “Taranto: Forma e sviluppo della topografia
    urbana,” pp. 119–69 in *AttiTaranto 41,* *2001* (Taranto, 2002). For
    an overall analysis of Tarentine necropoleis, see E. Lippolis,
    “Organizzazione delle necropoli e struttura sociale nell’Apulia
    ellenistica: Due esempi: Taranto e Canosa,” in *Romische
    Graberstrassen: Kolloquium in München vom 28. bis 30 Oktober 1985*,
    ed. H. von Hesberg and P. Zanker (Munich, 1987), pp. 139–54. On
    Macedonian influence on Tarentine funerary sculpture from the end of
    the fourth through the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, see E. Lippolis,
    “Ricostruzione e architettura a Taranto dopo Annibale,” in *Sicilia
    ellenistica, consuetudo italica: Atti del Convegno, Spoleto,
    Complesso monumentale di S. Nicolò, 5–7 novembre 2004*, ed. M.
    Osanna and M. Torelli (Rome, 2006), pp. 211–26.

[^34]: Pausanias 3.12.8–9, and 3.25–27; for funerary monuments in Sparta
    from the Archaic period, see S. Raftopoulou, “Contributo alla
    topografia di Sparta durante l’età geometrica ed arcaica,” in
    *AttiTaranto 41, 2001*(Taranto, 2002), pp. 25–42; also <span
    class="smcaps">Nafissi 1991</span>, pp. 321–22,
    331–34.

[^35]: On the supposed *heroön* of Orpheus, see <span
    class="smcaps">Lippolis 1982</span>, esp.
    126–28**.

[^36]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Lippolis 1994,</span> pp. 41–66.
    The context of a chamber tomb might have ensured better preservation
    of the group than a *naiskos*; archaeological studies have revealed
    that *naiskoi* were already being dismantled in Roman times, with
    resulting dispersal and fragmentation of the material.

[^37]: P. G. Guzzo and S. Luppino, “Due tombe fra Thurii e Crotone,”
    *MÉFRA* 92, no. 1 (1980), pp. 821–914, figs. 18–19.

[^38]: See <span class="smcaps">Bottini</span> 2000;
    also L. Todisco, “Nuovi dati e osservazioni sulla tomba delle
    danzatrici di Ruvo,” *AttiMGrecia* 3 (1994–95), p. 138, n. 112, and
    <span class="smcaps">Pensa 1977</span>, pp. 83–88.

[^39]: Evidence would include materials placed in the tomb, not just
    signs of prestige but also objects that affirm religious or social
    behaviors. See, for instance, the small golden lamina found at
    Caudium (modern Montesarchio) in a tomb from the fourth century
    <span class="smcaps">BC,</span> and the discovery
    of tombs such as the one in Ruvo del Monte that yielded a
    red-figured calyx krater showing the abduction of a young man by
    Eos, which can be interpreted as a metaphor for the hope of winning
    a new life after death. Similarly, the reference to Orphism, more
    allusive in the indigenous centers, can be viewed in the context of
    a theme of redemption and salvation, with reference to the myths of
    Boreas and Helen as well. Historical and philological studies have
    revealed the participation of indigenous personalities in
    Pythagorean life; in this connection, see A. Bottini, *Archeologia
    della salvezza* (Milan, 1992), pp. 104–15; P. Poccetti, “La
    diffusione di dottrine misteriche e sapienziali nelle culture
    indigene dell’Italia antica: Appunti per un dossier,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Tra Orfeo e Pitagora 2000</span>,
    pp. 91–126; <span class="smcaps">Bottini</span>
    2000; and A. Mele, “Il Pitagorismo e le popolazioni anelleniche,”
    *AION* 3 (1981), pp. 61–96.

[^40]: See F. G. Cavarretta, “Diffusione diacronica dell’iconografia di
    Orfeo in ambiente occidentale,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Masaracchia 1993</span>, pp.
    399–407. Pausanias mentions a statue of Orpheus on Mount Helikon,
    surrounded by statues of animals (9.30.4); at Therae in Laconia in
    the Temple of Eleusinian Demeter, there was a *xoanon* (cultic
    image) of Orpheus (3.20.5), and at Olympia, in the donarium of
    Mikythos, there was a votive statue of Orpheus from 460 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> (5.26.3).

[^41]: For Tarentine marble sculpture, <span
    class="smcaps">Belli Pasqua 1995</span>, pp. 3–8
    and for the connections with Attic production, pp. 45–46; see, in
    particular, the head of Athena from the first half of the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, derived
    from a prototype of the last third of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, pp. 47–48. On the
    cultural ties between Taras and Athens in the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC,</span> see also E. Lippolis,
    “Taranto e la politica di Atene in Occidente,” *Ostraka* 6, no. 2
    (1997), pp. 359–78.

[^42]: For the head of Athena in Brescia, see A. Giuliano, “I grandi
    bronzi di Riace, Fidia e la sua officina,” in *Due Bronzi di Riace:
    Rinvenimento, restauro, analisi ed ipotesi di interpretazione*,
    *BdA* ser. speciale 3 (1984), pp. 297–306, figs. 4–5. The head of
    Orpheus in Munich has been identified on the basis of its very close
    resemblance to a small bronze statue of Orpheus with a kithara at
    the Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg: see file no. 15, by R.
    Wunsche, in *I marmi colorati della Roma imperiale,* exh. cat., ed.
    M. De Nuccio and L. Ungaro (Rome, Mercati di Traiano, 2002), pp.
    315–16.

[^43]: See <span class="smcaps">Settis and
    Parra 2005</span>, pp. 259–62.

[^44]: The term “Master of the Singers of Taras” was proposed by Bonnie
    M. Kingsley in an unpublished study, which I was able to read. Some
    examples with similar features could be attributed to this
    workshop’s production: (1) a male bust wearing a pointed cap in the
    Sackler Museum at Harvard University (inv. 1943 1085); (2) two heads
    with a band and a wreath at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston,
    published in L. D. Caskey, “Greek Terracottas from Taranto,”
    *Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts* 29, no. 17 (1931), nos. 2 and
    10; (3) a bust of a banqueter from the antiquities market in Basel,
    cited in Münzen und Medaillen AG (Basel), sale cat., August 1962,
    pp. 23–24, no. 55; (4) a bust of a bearded figure from the
    collection of Thomas Virzì, which became part of the collection of
    the Antikenmuseum Basel, in <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürgen 1982</span>, no. 105
    (it should be noted that the distinctive curls on the heads of the
    Sirens were also sometimes used by the Tarentine coroplasts for
    beards); (5) a bust in the Museo Nazionale Archeologico di Taranto
    (inv. 20.003); (6) a head in a Phrygian cap, in <span
    class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen 1992</span>, no. 53,
    dated to 430–410 BC. See also the mold of the front section of a
    male head in the Musée d’Art et d’Histoire in Geneva, in <span
    class="smcaps">Deonna 1930</span>, pp. 67–74, fig.
    4, and the head of a banqueter with cap and partly finished head in
    D. von Bothmer, *Ancient Art from New York Private Collections*,
    exh. cat (New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1959–60), no. 179,
    pl. 62.

[^45]: For the terracottas of Ariccia, see <span
    class="smcaps">Carafa 1996</span>, in particular
    the bust in fig. 2 and M. Papini, *Antichi volti della Repubblica:
    La ritrattistica in Italia centrale tra IV e II secolo a.C.* (Rome,
    2004), pp. 222–24.
