---
title: Group of Heads and Busts from the Taranto Region
objects: 4..23
layout: false
---
#### Group of Heads and Busts from the Taranto Region (cat. 4–23)

<h6 class="discussion-note">This discussion is reproduced on each of the individual object pages</h6>

The group of twenty heads and busts (cat. 4–23) that were acquired by
the Getty Museum in 1982 share a number of technical characteristics,
despite the fact that they can be assigned to differing typologies and
very probably come from the same Tarentine workshop. Chronologically
they span a period from the second half of the fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> to the third and second centuries <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, and seem to be linked by a shared history.

In the documentation about this acquisition, the group of terracottas
was said to be connected to the extensive collection of Jacob Hirsch, a
renowned early twentieth-century numismatist and art dealer; his
collection also included a substantial array of material from Medma and
Taranto. At or shortly before Hirsch’s death in 1955, a portion of this
collection, which included over eight hundred terracottas, became the
property of his colleague Thomas Virzì, an antiquarian of Palermitan
origin who over the years played a crucial role in the illegal sale and
exportation of major artworks from Magna Graecia. Virzì was also a key
figure in the story of the “enthroned goddess” from Taranto, now in the
Altes Museum, Berlin, and he was an executor of Hirsch’s will, along
with R. Schlesinger and J. Caskell. In 1957, an auction was held in
Lucerne, and a selection of Hirsch’s original collection was offered for
sale. Initially, in 1961, Virzì attempted to sell a portion of the eight
hundred terracottas to the Antikenmuseum Basel; but it was not until the
end of the 1970s that the Swiss museum actually purchased a block of
artifacts from the former Virzì collection. This material had previously
been exhibited, along with other privately owned terracottas, in 1978.
The twenty examples published here show close parallels with the
material from Basel.[^1]

<br />

#### The Saturo Hypothesis

In the same documentation held by the Getty Museum, this group is said
to come “from Satyrion,” (modern Saturo), which stood on a promontory to
the southeast of Taranto. This area was occupied as early as the Bronze
Age, and it was one of the key locations in the region’s colonization,
as well as a major place of worship.[^2]

The Acropolis of Satyrion was a sacred site dating back to the Archaic
period, with evidence of a polyadic cult and worship attributable to
Athena*,* as attested by a dedicatory inscription. Behind the acropolis,
in a valley with a freshwater spring, there was a second vast cultic
area, showing signs of occupation dating back to the seventh century
<span class="smcaps">BC</span>, as we know from the
rich votive offerings that have been found there. This site of worship
was probably redefined in the Hellenistic period with the construction
of a *sacellum* (unroofed sacred building), inside which stood a sacred
statue and a *thesauros* (storehouse or treasury). A second *thesauros,*
containing coins and jewelry, was unearthed outside of the *sacellum*. A
vast necropolis, used from the Archaic through the Hellenistic periods,
covered part of the sacred area. Excavations were begun on the acropolis
in 1959 and continued in the 1960s and 1970s, extending to the sanctuary
area near the spring, with an intensification of digging between 1973
and 1977. The archaeological campaigns covered a broad territory, but
the complex stratigraphy of the sites was not definitively established.
Archaeologists did, however, unearth a substantial body of material,
amounting to several hundred thousand artifacts, some of high quality,
which still await a thorough critical publication. Inadequate
maintenance and protection of the excavation over the years has resulted
in serious tampering with the sites and circulation of a great deal of
material originally found in the sanctuary.[^3] According to a recent
study, the finds from deposits of votive offerings seem to date from no
later than the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, when the sanctuary suffered
serious damage during the Hannibalic War. There is evidence of
subsequent occupation of the area, with materials belonging to Roman
farms that can be dated between the first century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> and the first century AD.
Opinions differ as to the deities worshiped in the area: candidates
range from the nymph Satyria to Aphrodite Basilis associated with Gaia
or Persephone, in accordance with a complementary relationship of divine
functions that linked military domination of the territory with the
general realm of fertility, as evoked by the presence of the spring, and
the chthonic world.[^4]

Archaeological finds sold on the antiquities market are frequently
assigned generic findspots from the best-known archaeological sites,
such as Canosa, Taranto, or Locri (ancient Lokris). Also for this
reason, Saturo deserved special attention as a very probable place of
discovery. In fact, a brief and entirely preliminary examination of just
a small portion of the large array of material from Saturo, especially
the material linked to several *favissae* (burial places for sacred
objects), allowed me to establish the presence of heads belonging to
statues that had dimensions and typologies comparable to the Getty
group, as well as specifications of fabrication and a type of fabric
that were substantially similar, based on autoptic analysis.[^5]

In addition to the Basel material mentioned above, the Getty heads can
also be compared to the Tarentine heads in the collection of the Ny
Carlsberg Glyptotek in Copenhagen, which in all likelihood originated at
least in part from the rich votive deposit of the Fondo Giovinazzi in
Taranto. The latter must have been the site of a major sanctuary linked
to an adjoining necropolis, abounding in coroplastic material of a
variety of types, but most commonly that of the banqueter.[^6] Other
links can be seen to the Tarentine terracottas now in the Musei Civici
di Trieste.[^7]

Recently, wide-ranging research has been undertaken on objects
originating in various Tarentine votive contexts, which unfortunately
are often chance discoveries or finds lacking any reliable
documentation. Research in progress is based on scientifically
cataloguing, on archival information review, and on examination of the
objects’ associations and contexts, with a view to reinterpreting the
individual typologies in terms peculiarities and functions specific to
each topographic context.[^8] A similar study of the votive deposits of
Saturo and its coroplastic material, with special attention to the
statues and heads, might yield important new findings regarding the
prototypes to which they might be linked through variants and molds of
various generations.

<br />

#### The Typologies

The Getty group of terracottas comprises both busts and heads. The heads
can be assigned to statues and busts of medium and large format probably
deriving from one or several *favissae*, given that the votive offerings
appear to have been deliberately broken off at the neck or torso; this
ritual breakage was intended to prevent reuse of previously consecrated
material. The terracottas display a considerable typological diversity
and vary widely in age. There are female busts, generally datable to the
second half of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, with a prevalently chthonic
character ([cat. 9](9)–[10](10)); heads and busts of banqueters, characterized by
wreaths and bands ([cat. 7](7)), and in one case depicting a figure in the
act of singing ([cat. 8](8)), or with a nude bust ([cat. 21](21)); and heads of
male children and youths, some with strongly individualized features,
comparable with the coroplastic types of central Italy of the middle
Republican period ([cat. 19](19), [20](20), [23](23)).

The other heads, which can tentatively be dated to the fourth and third
centuries <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, can be
traced to types that are also well established in various Tarentine
votive contexts, reflecting the influence of sculptural prototypes by
Lysippus and Praxiteles developed with the distinctive eclecticism that
seems to be a main trait of the Tarentine coroplasts of the Early
Hellenistic period. During this period, especially between the fourth
century and the first half of the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, Taras enjoyed remarkable
prosperity and participated in the extensive cultural interactions among
Greeks, Etruscans, Italic ethnic groups, and those further afield,
thanks to its situation along trade routes that stretched from Greece,
Egypt, and the East to Italy and Sicily. Located at this crossroads,
Tarentine artists both received and transmitted stylistic models and
types to and from other regions.[^9]

Thus, in a number of works, such as the head at [cat. 21](21), we find
distinctive features derived from the portraits of Alexander the Great,
which were especially popular also in the workshops of neighboring
Heraclea and other Italic and Campanian centers.[^10] In other heads
([cat. 14](14) and [18](18)), we can identify echoes of Praxitelean style,
especially in the mournfully tilted heads and in the soft, modulated
chiaroscuro that seems to characterize a large portion of Tarentine
production in the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> From the end of the fifth
century to the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, moreover, we find other
distinctly Tarentine types: alongside the types that appear sorrowful,
with rapt expressions (for instance, [cat. 21](21)), with thin faces, lowered
gaze, and thickened eyelids, there are others (for example, [cat. 15](15) and
the head of Orpheus, [cat. 1](1)) that have full faces, marked features
reminiscent of the Severe style, and small mouths with fleshy lips that
can be found in the sculpture of the same period, influenced by Attic
art of the post-Phidian period.[^11] The original contributions of
Tarentine masters can be seen in the countless adaptations, revisions,
variations, and reprises of the figurative vocabulary emanating from the
Hellenic world and merging with vital local elements, which led to a
continuous renewal of the Tarentine figurative culture. This rich and
inventive vein can also be seen in soft-stone statuary and in marble
funerary heads datable to the late fourth and third century centuries
<span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^12] In particular, a
number of our heads reveal a marked characterization of the facial
features; though they cannot be classified as full-fledged portraits,
they seem to reflect individualized features within the context of a
somewhat rigidly codified iconographic repertory and representational
models.

In fact, we cannot rule out the possibility that the artisans may have
used as prototypes portraits derived from Early Hellenistic imagery,
adding to those models individual features or distinctive attributes
appropriate to the pertinent religious context.[^13] The influence of
Tarentine coroplastic models, which developed in the context of the
koine of early Hellenism, would ultimately influence not only southern
Italian centers such as Lucera or Heraclea, but, in some cases, more
distant regions such as Etruria, middle Italic centers, and even Rome,
which, as it absorbed this tradition, enriched it with various
components of Italic Hellenism. The discovery of terracotta statues and
heads in a votive deposit in Ariccia, for instance, suggests that
southern Italy may have played a role as intermediary in the
transformation of tastes and formal choices of artists and craftsmen in
central Italy, in part following Roman conquests in Magna Graecia.[^14]

The presence of various types of votive offerings in Saturo and the
relations among them, as is generally the case in the Tarentine
religious contexts, is an area of study that awaits thorough examination
based on a systematic analysis of individual sites. Such typological and
iconographic diversity can only be understood in relation to the nature
of deities worshiped in Saturo and their manifold and complementary
roles, some of which were mentioned above: military protection of the
territory, assurance of fertility, safeguarding of children from
illness, and chthonic and funerary rites.

<br />

#### The Female Busts

In the case of the busts ([cat. 9](9)–[10](10)), the similarity to Sicilian
prototypes is reasonably straightforward. The typology, however, was
modified and elaborated by Tarentine coroplasts with the introduction of
new hairstyles (such as hair gathered in a roll behind the neck, derived
from the Severe style) and a distinctive stylistic vocabulary. This is
particularly notable in the emphatic rendering of the eyes and mouths
and in the precise, compact forms, coupled with the linear treatment of
the hair (probably achieved by means of special comb-like tools that
helped to speed a vast serial production), which suggests a link between
the Getty busts and the Tarentine workshops; in particular, [cat. 9](9) and
[10](10) seem to indicate a transitional phase from the shorthand depiction of
deities (often depicted with *polos*, the high crown worn by goddesses)
to the actual portrayal of the offerers, shown with progressively
individuated facial features. In statuary, this phenomenon would become
increasingly marked as Roman influence grew.[^15]

<br />

#### Children

The head of a child ([cat. 23](23)), characterized by a cheerful expression
and a sentimental pose conveyed by the slight tilt of the head, displays
an iconographic affinity with comparable heads from the central Italic
area as well was with the specific typology of crouching children that
became common in the Near East and in Greece beginning in the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span> Crouching
children, often depicted holding an object or a small animal, can be
found in Magna Graecia and in Saturo, but also throughout the Etruscan
and Italic world between the third and second centuries <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> It may be that a number of
types already present in the central Italic context were re-elaborated
by the coroplasts of Magna Graecia in response to specific cult
practices and patronage. As regards Saturo, there may be links with
kourotrophic cults as well as with the presence of the spring, or with
rites of passage from infancy to adulthood.[^16]

<br />

#### The Banqueters

The heads at [cat. 7](7), [8](8), [20](20), and [21](21)
are certainly linked to reclining
figures or banqueters. Many unanswered questions remain regarding the
banqueters in Saturo, including chronology, context, cult significance,
and iconography; their numerous and diffuse presence, however, is
attested in votive deposits of the Tarentine funerary zone at least up
to the end of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, when other types common
throughout the Hellenistic Mediterranean were introduced in Taras. The
type of the banqueter, which could be interpreted in a variety of ways,
is more significant if it can be related to the specific context and
associated material, which is unfortunately unknown for this group.

The reclining figure has often been assimilated with the figure of Hades
or compared to the Tarentine hero Phalanthos, but also to the heroized
deceased affiliated with the funerary cult of Zeus Katabaites. Enzo
Lippolis has discussed the hypothesis that the image of the banqueter
represents the transition of the deceased to the new otherworldly life,
a moment that is codified through participation in a ritual symposion
and the offering of an image of the heroized deceased. He notes that
examination of the coroplastic material of the Tarentine votive deposits
makes it is clear that the banqueter is almost invariably associated
with diversified typologies, ranging from female figures belonging to
the sphere of Demeter, to reliefs featuring the Dioscuri (Castor and
Pollux), to the types of Polyboia (Polyboea) and Hyakinthos, to the
statuettes of Artemis Bendis. For this, he refers to the study of
individual contexts to attempt to clarify the specific aspect of the
image.[^17]

Of special interest in this connection is the discovery in a chamber
tomb at Centuripe (a center that in the Hellenistic period had cultural
and economic relations with the Apulian area) of a terracotta relief
depicting a banqueting scene, a male figure with a horse, and an
athlete, dating from the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, in which there appear to be
strong iconographic and typological links with Tarentine artisanal
production. In these relief slabs, we also see motifs and elements that
can be interpreted as the heroization of the deceased, clearly defined
in terms of the social and political role that he played within the
Centuripe community.[^18] This tendency in funerary practices to
emphasize the decedent’s status has yet to be defined with certainty in
the Tarentine context. Though it seems that no banqueter has been found
in the contents of a tomb, it can be proposed that the image of the
reclining figure may be connected to specific ritual functions within
the necropolis and that it was intended to codify the new status of the
deceased with reference to a specific otherworldly collocation.[^19]

<br />

#### Technical Aspects

The fronts of pieces were produced with a mold; so, probably, were the
backs, though the latter are only rounded off and not detailed. The hair
might in some cases have been attached, as suggested by [cat. 19](19) in which
the separation of the locks is quite evident; attributes such as crowns
and diadems could have been applied later as well.[^20] The hole in the
back of the head was intended for ventilation during the firing process.

The pieces feature, primarily, fabrics of two hues: a pinkish-orange and
a light beige. Both fabrics are porous, with a reasonably soft
consistency and micaceous inclusions, with thickness ranging up to 2
centimeters. The pieces show evidence of uneven firing, resulting in
shades that varied according to their distance from the heat source and
to the presence or absence in the clay of grease-cutting substances that
were used to ensure greater porosity and reduce the risk of deformation
during the drying process. A grayish, poorly baked core characterizes
some of the pieces. Before firing, the pieces were retouched with a
pointed or toothed tool; and the hair, headgear, hats, and other
accessories were added or shaped, a procedure that made it possible to
diversify standard types.[^21] Nearly all the heads feature marked
asymmetries in the faces. In sculpture, faces with asymmetries were
usually intended to be seen in three-quarter view, from below, making it
possible to recompose visually the entire facial structure in a more
organic manner. The presence of these asymmetries in mass-produced
terracottas, unconnected to the final placement, remains to be
explained. We cannot exclude the possibility that the objects were
derived from sculptural prototypes with these lifelike
characteristics.[^22]

Once they were fired, the pieces were painted so as to emphasize their
most distinctive features and, in some cases, to cover up defects and
inaccuracies in workmanship; the pigment was applied over a layer of
white, which generally consisted of calcite or kaolinite, smoothed over
the clay surface for better adhesion of the pigment. Occasionally, a
piece would be coated with a layer of diluted clay before the white
pigment was laid on. The limited palette was part of the
well-established artisanal tradition. From the traces of pigment that
have survived, it has been deduced that the hair on the male heads was
painted red, as were the lips, while pink was used for the complexion.
The use of strong colors was intended to enliven the figures’
expressions. The quality of the molds was quite good and the details
were well defined. In a number of the heads, two holes are visible at
the sides of the head, probably corresponding to the points where the
hair was attached, or at the base of the neck, where decorations could
be inserted. The fact that the backs of the heads were not properly
finished would indicate that the pieces were to be viewed only from the
front.

<br />

#### Notes

[^1]: The history of the Hirsch-Virzì collection, with specific
    reference to material from Medma, now in the collection of the Basel
    Antikenmuseum, has been reconstructed in <span
    class="smcaps">Paoletti 1981</span>, pp. 69–71,
    with bibliography, and in a review, also by M. Paoletti, of <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürgen</span> 1978 in
    *Prospettiva* 23 (1980), pp. 90–95. For the catalogue of the auction
    held in Lucerne, see A. Hess, *Bedeutende Kunstwerke* (Lucerne,
    1957). For the Basel material: <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürgen</span> 1971; H.
    Herdejürgen, “Tarentinische Terrakotten der Sammlinug Schwitter,”
    *AK* 16 (1973), pp. 102–8.

[^2]: For the research carried out in Saturo between 1970s and 1980, see
    F. G. Lo Porto, “Satyrion (Taranto): Scavi e ricerche nel luogo del
    più antico insediamento laconico in Puglia,” *NSc* 18 (1964), pp.
    177–279; F. G. Lo Porto, “L’attività archeologica in Puglia,” in
    *AttiTaranto 11, 1971*, text volume (Taranto, 1972), p. 500; idem,
    *AttiTaranto 12, 1972* (Taranto, 1973), pp. 363–76; idem,
    *AttiTaranto* *13, 1973* (Taranto, 1974), pp. 413–22, esp. 420–21;
    idem, “Recenti scoperti archeologiche in Puglia,” *AttiTaranto* *16,
    1976* (Taranto, 1977), pp. 725–45, esp. 728–33; *AttiTaranto 17,
    1977* (Taranto, 1978), pp. 495–504, esp. 499–500. Also, see M.
    Torelli, in *AttiTaranto* *16, 1976* (Taranto, 1977), p. 956; E. De
    Juliis, *AttiTaranto* *19, 1979* (Taranto, 1980), pp. 428–29. On the
    cults present in Saturo, see M. Osanna, “Sui culti arcaici di Sparta
    e Taranto: Afrodite Basilis,” *PdP* 45 (1990), pp. 81–94; E.
    Lippolis, “Le testimonianze del culto in Taranto greca,” *Taras* 2
    (1982), pp. 81–135. For a summary of the research done in Saturo,
    see <span class="smcaps">Settis and Parra</span>
    2005, pp. 439–40; *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto* 1995</span>, pp. 80–87.
    For coroplastic material, see also <span
    class="smcaps">Monetti 2004</span>–200<span
    class="smcaps">5</span>. The bibliography of
    material on Saturo has been enriched over the years by various
    contributions on specific research topics, in particular on Laconian
    vases from Saturo, on which see P. Pelagatti and C. M. Stibbe, “La
    ceramica laconica a Taranto e nella Puglia,” in *AttiTaranto* *41,
    2001* (2002), pp. 365–403. On the topography and models of
    settlement, see M. A. Dell’Aglio, *Leporano alle origini di un
    territorio*, exh. cat. (Taranto, Castello di Leporano, 1993); A.
    Alessio and P. G. Guzzo, “Santuari e fattorie ad est di Taranto:
    Elementi archeologici per un modello di interpretazione,” *ScAnt*
    3–4 (1989–90), pp. 363–96; <span
    class="smcaps">Osanna</span> 1992; and M. A.
    Dell’Aglio, *Il parco archeologico di Saturo Porto Perone: Leporano,
    Taranto* (Taranto, 1999).

[^3]: In this connection, see P. Pelagatti, “Sulla dispersione del
    patrimonio archeologico: Le ragioni di un secondo incontro e il caso
    Sicilia,” in <span class="smcaps">Pelagatti and
    Guzzo 1997</span>, pp. 9–28, esp. p. 24.

[^4]: On this topic, see <span class="smcaps">Settis
    and Parra 2005</span>, <span
    class="smcaps">Lippolis</span> 2001; *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto* 1995</span>, pp. 84–85;
    and <span class="smcaps">Osanna</span> 1992. In
    general, on the presence in a sanctuary of religious rituals
    directed toward deities other from those to whom the sanctuary was
    dedicated, see B. Alroth, “Visiting Gods,” *ScAnt* 3–4 (1989–90),
    pp. 301–10; B. Alroth, “Visiting Gods: Who and Why,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Linders and Nordquist 1987</span>,
    pp. 9–19.

[^5]: In the past, I was able to view a limited part of the extensive
    material from Saturo that lies in storage at the Soprintendenza
    Archeologica of Taranto. For the terracottas quoted as comparisons,
    I noted the pertinent *favissa* number and number of the crate in
    which it was stored. I would like to thank the former director of
    the Museo Nazionale Archeologico di Taranto, Dr. Antonietta
    Dell’Aglio, for allowing me to view this material, and the museum
    personnel for their courteous help. The association between the
    Hirsch-Virzì collection and the sanctuary at Saturo remains to be
    clarified. It may be that in the complicated paths of acquisition
    diverse and conflicting information muddied the history of the
    pieces.

[^6]: For the Copenhagen material, see <span
    class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen 1992</span>, pp.
    75–97; on the Fondo Giovinazzi: *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto* 1995</span>, pp. 71–77.

[^7]: The collection of terracottas now in the Musei Civici di Trieste
    was formed through a series of acquisitions on the antiquities
    market in the late nineteenth century. The catalogue of the
    collection is newly published: <span
    class="smcaps">Poli</span> 2010. See also N. Poli,
    “La collezione tarentina del Civico Museo di Storia e Arte di
    Trieste: Storia della formazione,” *Taras* 21, no. 2 (2001), pp.
    79–94. A number of items appear in <span
    class="smcaps">Winter</span> 1903 (i.e., the
    pieces on p. 4, no. 8b; p. 31, no. 2; p. 42; and p. 52, no. 7),
    where drawings are reproduced. Several references to these
    materials, some of which probably came from the funerary deposits of
    Pizzone, can be found in <span
    class="smcaps">Wuilleumier 1939</span>, pp.
    396–439; for this large deposit, see <span
    class="smcaps">Poli</span> 2010a . M. Borda
    published a number of statuettes in his *Arte dedalica a Taranto*
    (Pordenone, 1979), pp. 36–38, 46–55, and “La kourotrophos dedalica
    da Taranto del Museo Civico di Trieste,” *<span
    class="smcaps">Aparchai* 1982</span>, vol. 1, pp.
    85–96.

[^8]: See <span class="smcaps">Lippolis</span> 2001.
    Also worth noting is the methodological introduction in *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto* 1995</span>, pp. 41–49:
    most of the Tarentine votive deposits show a clear relationship with
    the necropoleis, even though the function of terracottas in funerary
    rituals and their iconographic interpretation within this context
    remain problematic. In this connection, see D. Graepler, “La
    necropoli e la cultura funeraria,” in *AttiTaranto* *41, 2001*
    (Taranto, 2002), pp. 193–218.

[^9]: An overarching picture of the cultural exchanges between Taras,
    the Apulian region, and cultural centers of the eastern
    Mediterranean—particularly Macedonia and Egypt—is laid out by J. P.
    Morel in “Taranto nel Mediterraneo in epoca ellenistica,” in
    *AttiTaranto 41, 2001* (Taranto, 2002), pp. 529–74, and in the
    contribution by N. Bonacasa in that volume, pp. 593–60; see also E.
    Ghisellini, “Una statua femminile alessandrina da Egnazia:
    Considerazioni sui rapporti tra Apulia e l’Egitto tolemaico,”
    *Xenia* 2 (1993), pp. 45–70. On the influence of Taranto on the
    workshops of Corinth, Cyrene, and Sicily, especially in the third
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, see D.
    Graepler, “Des Tanagréens en offrandes funéraires: L’exemple de
    Tarente,” in <span class="smcaps">Jeammet
    2003</span>b, pp. 277–84. The production of entire life-sized (or
    slightly smaller) terracotta statues is clearly attested in Taranto
    and in Magna Graecia; see, for example, the head in <span
    class="smcaps">Pugliese Carratelli 1983</span>,
    pp. 501–502, figs, 546–47; see also the statues found near Heraclea,
    ibid., p. 501, fig. 545.

[^10]: On Lysippos’s influence in Taras, see also <span
    class="smcaps">Lippolis 1996</span>, pp. 314.
    Excavations performed on the acropolis of Heraclea uncovered
    coroplastic workshops with kilns for firing both vases and figures
    and many molds reproducing various types of statuary by the
    Sicyonian artist presumably connected to a “branch of the school of
    Lysippos” that moved to Heraclea. See P. Moreno, *Il genio
    differente. Alla scoperta della maniera antica* (Milan, 2002), pp.
    151–59.

[^11]: On characteristics of Tarentine plastic arts in the Hellenistic
    period and relations with the Attic post-Phidian milieu, see <span
    class="smcaps">Orlandini 1983</span>, pp. 482–506.
    For a more general discussion of the blending of various elements in
    Western sculpture, particularly at the beginning in the second half
    of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, see <span
    class="smcaps">Rolley</span> 1994–99, vol. 2, pp.
    191–96. The melancholy type with finely drawn features, so common in
    Taranto, also characterizes the heads of the Dioscuri in a group
    from the Ionian temple of Marasà in Locri dating to the late fifth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>; see F.
    Costabile, “Le statue frontonali del tempio Marasà a Locri,” *RM*
    102 (1995), pp. 9–62; P. Danner, *Westgriechische Akrotere* (Mainz,
    1997), p. 63, B 40. See also <span
    class="smcaps">Croissant 2007</span>, pp.
    316*–*20.

[^12]: On marble or stone funerary statues in the Hellenistic age, see
    <span class="smcaps">Belli Pasqua 1995</span>, pp.
    65–67.

[^13]: On the presence of typified terracotta heads in the mid-Italic
    region and relations between Taras and the production of southern
    Etruria and the Italic centers, see M. Papini, *Antichi volti della
    Repubblica: La ritrattistica in Italia centrale tra IV e II secolo
    a.C.* (Rome, 2004), pp. 207–80. See also S. Ciaghi in <span
    class="smcaps">Bonghi Jovino 1990</span>, pp.
    127–45 and <span class="smcaps">Pensabene</span>
    2001, pp. 88–89; C. Rolley, “La scultura della Magna Grecia,” in
    <span class="smcaps">Pugliese Carratelli
    1996</span>, pp. 378–79; S. Steingräber, “Zum Phänomen der
    etruskisch-italischen Votivköpfe,” *RM* 87 (1980), p. 236; A.
    Maggiani, “Il problema del ritratto,” in *Artigianato artistico:
    L’Etruria settentrionale interna in età ellenistica* (Milan, 1985),
    pp. 89–95.

[^14]: For the presence in Lucera of Tarentine craftsmen specializing in
    works of higher artistic quality, such as statues, see <span
    class="smcaps">D’Ercole 1990</span>, pp. 307–12;
    <span class="smcaps">Orlandini 1983</span>, pp.
    501–6. For the Tarentine influence in Ariccia, see <span
    class="smcaps">Carafa</span> 1996*,* pp. 273–94.
    We should also consider observations on fragments of later fictile
    statues from the area of the Domus Tiberiana on the Palatine Hill,
    Rome, dating from the first century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> and related to a
    neo-Attic milieu; it is apparent from the hairstyles and the
    rendering of the facial features that they derive from the plastic
    arts of Magna Graecia of the fifth and fourth centuries <span
    class="smcaps">BC;</span> see <span
    class="smcaps">Tomei 1992</span>, pp. 171–226.

[^15]: For the passage to a more individualized typology see P.
    Pensabene, “Cippi busti e ritratti: Nota in margine a M. F. Kilmer,
    ‘The Shoulder Bust in Sicily and South and Central Italy,’ Göteborg,
    1977,” *ArchCl* 16 (1977), pp. 425–35. On the Romanization of
    Apulia, see E. Lippolis, *Fra Taranto e Roma: Società e cultura
    urbana in Puglia tra Annibale e l’età imperiale* (Taranto, 1998) pp.
    39–55, 101–11.

[^16]: For crouching children, see the bibliography for [cat. 23](23).

[^17]: For reclining figures, see *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto* 1995</span>, pp. 166–69
    and nos. 6 and 9; for Metaponto, see G. M. Signore, “Rilievi fittili
    con recumbente dal Ceramico di Metaponto,” *Studi di Antichità* 9
    (1996), pp. 299–359. On the reclining figures in Locri, see M. Barra
    Bagnasco, “I recumbenti,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco 1977</span>, pp.
    151–69. For the reclining figures in Sicily and in particular those
    coming from the votive deposit of Fontana Calda at Butera, see <span
    class="smcaps">Portale 2008</span>, pp. 42–44 with
    prior bibliography. For the subject in general, see J. M. Dentzer,
    *Le motif du banquet couché dans le Proche-Orient et le monde grec
    du VII au IV siècle avant J.C.*, Bibliothèque des écoles françaises
    d’Athènes et de Rome 246 (Rome, 1982).

[^18]: See A. Pautasso, “Rilievi da una tomba d’età ellenistica di
    Centuripe,” in G. Rizza*, Scavi e ricerche a Centuripe* (Palermo,
    2002), pp. 115–26. The close ties between the craftsmen of Taras and
    those of Kentoripa (Centuripe) in the Hellenistic period can be
    documented not only in the field of terracotta but also in
    polychrome pottery. Those contacts were probably established in part
    through the military campaigns conducted in Magna Graecia by
    Dionysius I and II and Agathocles and in the wake of the Hannibalic
    War; regarding these, see E. Lippolis, “La ceramica policroma
    tarantina,” *Taras* 14 (1994), pp. 263–310. For the discoveries of
    Tarentine reclining figures in Sicily, see also M. Barra Bagnasco,
    “I recumbenti,” in <span class="smcaps">Barra
    Bagnasco 1977*,*</span>pp. 151–69, n. 27.

[^19]: On the heroic connotation and the aristocratic ideal that can be
    seen in the funerary deposits of the Hellenistic period, see <span
    class="smcaps">Abruzzese Calabrese 1996</span>,
    pp. 189–97. We should also consider in this context the significance
    of the *semata* in <span class="smcaps">Lippolis
    1994</span>, pp. 109–28. On the relationship between votive deposits
    and funerary areas in Taranto, see *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto* 1995</span>, pp. 41–49.

[^20]: See the introduction, above, and also E. Paribeni, “Volti, teste
    calve e parrucche,” *AttiMGrecia* n.s. 2 (1958), pp. 63–68. For
    rounded-off backs of heads achieved by molds, see the example of a
    head and bust mold of Artemis in Geneva’s Musée d’Art et d’Histoire
    published in <span class="smcaps">Kingsley</span>
    1981, pp. 44 and 46, figs. 6–8.

[^21]: On the effects of technical procedures, see <span
    class="smcaps">Merker 2000</span>, p. 18.

[^22]: On the facial asymmetries, see S. Stucchi, “Nota introduttiva
    sulle correzioni ottiche nell’arte greca fino a Mirone,” *Annuario
    della Scuola archeologica in Atene e delle Missioni italiane in
    Oriente* 30–32 (1952–54), pp. 23–73; and L. A. Schneider,
    *Asymmetrie griechischer Köpfe vom 5. J-h. bis zum Hellenismus*
    (Wiesbaden, 1973), pp. 6–10. On relations between terracotta
    statuary and bronze sculpture, see C. Vaphopoulou-Richardson, “Large
    Sculpture and Minor Arts: A Brief Survey of the Relationship between
    Sculpture and Terracotta Figurines,” in *Akten des XIII
    Internationalen Kongresses für klassische Archäologie, Berlin, 1988*
    (Mainz am Rhein, 1990), pp. 396–97. On the hypothesis that certain
    prototypes were developed from models designed for bronzes, see
    <span class="smcaps">Merker 2000,</span> p. 14.
