---
title: Classification
layout: page
cover: 82.AD.93.1.detail_1
sort_order: 5
---

The catalogue includes sixty terracottas, presented according to
presumed origins from two major areas: South Italy and Sicily. Within
these two major groups, the objects have been further subdivided by the
specific contexts they suggest and are generally organized by their
typological classes.

Each catalogue entry begins with a brief description of the terracotta
fabric and the decoration. The fabric has been analyzed using a
macroscopic examination aimed at identifying the consistency and
chromatic characteristics, defined with reference to the Munsell color
charts. However, this examination method has intrinsic limitations,
since a single type of clay can take on different colorings or nuances
in different sections of an individual piece, depending on the
temperature and duration of the firing process and the conditions of the
kiln. More importantly, there is a high level of subjectivity involved
in this form of visual analysis.[^1] As regards decoration, the presence
of white clay slip or diluted clay has been reported, and in cases where
the piece has been subjected to a technical examination, the presence
and type of pigments have been noted.

Measurements are given in centimeters and in general are the maximum
height (H), width (W), and depth (D); in some cases, other significant
dimensions are also included.

The “Condition” section provides information about the piece’s state of
conservation and technique of manufacture. Further analyses have been
carried out by the Antiquities Conservation Department on several of the
terracottas with the intention of determining the presence of polychrome
pigments, the nature of potential anomalies or prior restorations, as
well as the technique of manufacture. In such cases, the results are
shown in appendices at the end of the catalogue entry.

Under the heading “Provenance,” the object’s collection history prior to
acquisition by the J. Paul Getty Museum is given.

The object “Bibliography” section lists both publications devoted to the
piece in question and those in which the piece is only mentioned.
Citations that are mentioned several times in the catalogue and notes
are cited with an abbreviation; the full references are in the general
“Bibliography.”

The body of each catalogue entry consists of an iconographic description
and a critical commentary with the pertinent comparisons, dating
hypotheses, and possible origins. The suggested dating is based, where
possible, on comparisons with materials from excavation contexts or,
more frequently, through references to stylistic and iconographical
analogies.[^2]

#### Notes

[^1]: *Munsell Soil Color Charts*, rev. ed. (New York, 1992). For
    concerns that have been raised about the use of color charts, see N.
    Cuomo di Caprio, *La ceramica in archeologia: Antiche tecniche di
    lavorazione e moderni metodi d’indagine* (Rome, 1985), p. 175, and
    M. <span class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco</span>
    1986, p. 106. Only an accurate archaeometric analysis can
    definitively identify differences in the structure and mineral
    composition of the fabric.

[^2]: The chronology, based on stylistic considerations, always pertains
    to the creation of the prototype: because molds were used for the
    serial production of pieces, iconographical and typological models
    could persist over a very long period.
