---
title: Introduction
cover: 82.AD.93.1.detail_1
layout: page
---
This catalogue, which features a selection of terracottas from South
Italy and Sicily now in the collection of the J. Paul Getty Museum, was
born from a preliminary study of the coroplastic collection carried out
during a graduate internship at the Getty Museum in 1988–89.[^1] The
assignment of the terracottas to these geographical areas is based on
stylistic analysis, on the appearance of the clay, and on information
related to the objects’ acquisition. The terracottas were for the most
part purchased on the art market from the 1970s onward; a few were
private donations. Most have never been published, though some have been
presented in preliminary and general publications. One group of nine
examples comes from the collection of Barbara and Lawrence Fleischman,
acquired by the Museum in 1996.[^2]

Only one of the sixty terracottas presented in this publication comes
from a certain, datable context ([cat. 60](./catalogue/60)), and thus for the most part it
is impossible to reconstruct with confidence their potential
associations with other materials. Furthermore, this selection
intentionally presents significant variations in typology and
chronology, spanning many centuries from the Archaic to the Late
Hellenistic period. In addition, the intrinsic nature of the collection
imposes certain limitations on this catalogue, as one cannot base the
interpretative theories on solid foundations that might deepen our
understanding of a specific center, region, or cultural context.

Certain aspects of the methods, objectives, and results presented in
this catalogue merit attention. The catalogue presents a selection of
the most significant typologies of the terracottas in the collection,
and includes unique pieces as well more ordinary ones that were acquired
as donations. Overall, the Getty’s antiquities collection is comprised
of over 1000 terracotta statues, statuettes, and other object types,
ranging in date from the Neolithic to the Roman period, the great
majority of which can be associated with votive deposits in southern and
central Italy, especially the areas of Campania, Lucania (Metaponto),
and Puglia (Taranto). The decision to organize the catalogue by region
and site, even if such identifications are hypothetical, derives from
the methodological approach of the study.

The purpose of this work is to present a range of objects of significant
iconographic and stylistic interest, in some cases characterized by
those qualities of uniqueness that generally reflect the tastes of
private collectors. Comparisons with material from excavations and
critical discussions helps not only to define those qualities but also
to narrow down, as much as possible, the objects’ place of manufacture
and possible cultural context. In this manner, we have identified the
Lakonian colony of Taras (Taranto) and the sites of ancient Canusion
(Canosa), Medma (Rosarno), Selinous (Selinunte), Kentoripa (Centuripe),
and Morgantina as possible original centers of production for most of
the objects presented in this volume. I considered it to be especially
useful to indicate the hypothetical findspot of each object, even if
doubtful (in some cases, noted at the time of acquisition), rather than
limiting my work to a general typological or stylistic analysis, which
would inevitably have relegated the items to the status of decorative
pieces.

My approach could hardly overlook certain difficulties. First and
foremost is the circulation of molds and statuettes among the various
centers of production in Sicily and Magna Graecia, a circumstance that
leaves significant margins of doubt as to the exact origins of an
object. Moreover, in cases where no scientific analysis of the clay was
performed, visual examination can provide only a hypothetical
attribution of context. Nonetheless, I feel certain that this study,
when made available to a wider audience, can enrich further research in
the field and contribute substantially to our understanding of various
aspects of the artifacts from the ancient world. In fact, such
artifacts, having been handed down through the filter of collectors,
sometimes seem to fit poorly within established hermeneutic categories,
which too often are excessively codified and conventional. I hope that
this catalogue and the accompanying Guide to the Collection of South
Italian and Sicilian Terracottas, which indexes over a thousand other
statuettes and molds at the Getty, will encourage wider comparison and
connections to materials of more certain archaeological contexts.[^3]

<br />

#### Notes

[^1]: The manuscript was mostly completed in 2008 in a new context of
    cultural and scientific collaboration between the J. Paul Getty
    Museum, the Italian Ministry of Culture, and the Assessorato
    Regionale dei Beni Culturali e dell’Identità Siciliana. Prior to
    final editing, bibliographical references have been updated through
    2010 or in selected cases, to 2013; the bibliography for individual
    objects is current through 2015.

[^2]: Cat. 24, 27, 29–33, 35–36, 44–46, and 58. The collection was
    published in the catalogue *<span
    class="smcaps">Passion for Antiquities</span>*
    1994.

[^3]: See the essays by P. Pelagatti and N. Bonacasa in <span
    class="smcaps">Pelagatti and Guzzo</span> 1997,
    pp. 9–28, and the introduction to the British Museum catalogue <span
    class="smcaps">Burn and Higgins</span> 2001*,* pp.
    16–17.
