Production Techniques

The production process for terracotta statuettes and statues has been
thoroughly described in many publications, so only a brief summary of
the most recent studies on the subject is provided here. The technique
for the manufacture of the *arulae* (altars) and reliefs is described in
the individual entries.

Statuettes were generally made with single or bivalve molds that were,
in turn, made from a clay model, also known as an archetype, patrix, or
prototype. The prototype also made it possible to fashion individual
sections of models, which, when combined with other cast parts, could
form a new type.[^1] After the firing of the model, the mold was
obtained by pressing clay into the model until it reached the proper
thickness.[^2] A very important step during the production of a mold was
the retouching of the individual details; in some cases, this work was
very substantive and could differentiate the new cast from the
archetype.

If the object to be reproduced was very large and it presented a number
of points that were undercut or parts that projected out sharply (for
example, forearms or bent legs), it was preferable to create a number of
partial molds, or half molds, added *à la barbotine*—that is, adhered
with a clay slip—after the positive cast had been molded but before it
was fired; this approach offered a number of obvious technical
advantages but also permitted a variety of compositional solutions. In
much the same way, special accessories could be added to the clothing,
hair, or ornaments. In some cases, the back section of the positive-cast
statuette might consist of just a simple sheet of clay, or it could be
rounded off and worked roughly by hand to give the impression of the
curved back of the cranium; or there could be a fully modeled back, made
with a bivalve mold. In the latter case, to facilitate the assembly of
the two parts, a guideline was marked on the mold, consisting of incised
lines or a light relief on the edge. Signs, numbers, or letters might be
marked on the mold, or even on the positives, usually on the back, as is
the case with the five statues of mourning women from Canosa (cat.
38–42); these were for the artisan’s use during the production process.

When the first-generation molds became worn, new ones could be made. In
cases where it was no longer possible to reuse the original model, new
molds could be made from an existing positive. These second-generation
molds were thus somewhat smaller than their predecessors, and subsequent
generations were smaller still as the process continued.[^3]

Once the mold was fired, it was ready for serial production. Clay was
pressed into the interior to the desired consistency and thickness. The
clay was allowed to dry partially and therefore to shrink, facilitating
the extraction of the positive from the mold. In some cases, the head
was not part of the figure mold but was added to the figure once the
latter was extracted from the mold. The head might be a solid piece or,
if large, hollow. It could be attached through straightforward assembly
or by use of a necklike tenon, as in the head of a male banqueter (cat.
7).

Details, such as earrings or wreaths, were generally done freehand.
Before firing, the coroplast had a last opportunity to retouch the
figure with a spatula or other sharp tool. Usually the hair was defined
during this phase. The holes of various sizes and shapes that we often
find on the back of the figures were not only for ventilation during
drying and kiln-firing but could also help in modeling the figure; if
they were for ventilation alone, they could have been much smaller than
is often the case.

Next came the firing of the positive casts, during which great care had
to be taken to ensure that the artifacts were at the proper distance
from the heat source and that the temperature was properly regulated in
order to prevent cracking or other forms of damage. A layer of clay slip
or white pigment (white lead kaolinite, or calcite) was usually applied
to the entire figure, rendering it waterproof and improving its
appearance by eliminating obvious porosity, as well as providing a good
undercoat for the decoration. Analysis carried out at the British Museum
on the white ground present on a group of statuettes from various
locations demonstrated that this procedure must have been done after
firing. This was certainly true when kaolinite was used, as it breaks
down at temperatures above about 500°C.[^4]

After firing, the figure would be decorated with colored pigments: black
(lampblack for the Seated Poet and Sirens group, cat. 1–3) was generally
used for the eyes and eyebrows; dark red (red ocher) for the hair or for
coloring male flesh; red (mercuric sulfide, or cinnabar) for hair, lips,
and some parts of the clothing; pink (red ocher and chalk; or cinnabar,
lead white, and chalk) for female complexions and for accessories or
parts of the clothing and drapery; dark blue (Egyptian blue) for various
accessories (or, for instance, on the beard of the head of Hades, cat.
60); and dark brown (umber, iron oxide) for accessory parts.[^5]

Production techniques could differ for mid-sized and larger statues.
Recent studies of statues of mourning women from Canosa now at the Musée
du Louvre showed that the statues were made by laying clay pieces over a
conical tubular clay structure; arms and head were then inserted into
special holes made in the structure (see cat. 38–42). In the case of the
Seated Poet and Sirens group (cat. 1–3), the figures were the result of
a careful process of manual modeling around an armature, possibly of
wood; a number of parts were then added, some cast from molds and others
hand-worked. The figures were then assembled and finished by rendering
details with careful tool work during the retouching phase.[^6]

[^1]: The use of these terms is not necessarily consistent in the
    literature on the subject, inasmuch as they imply varying degrees of
    resemblance to the finished product. On the use of the terms
    *series*, *group*, and *type*, R. V. Nicholls defines a *group* as
    including works that are linked together by shared features
    traceable back to the same artisan or workshop. Arthur Muller, on
    the other hand, uses *group* to designate works that can be linked
    by features of a technical order but which may not necessarily
    originate from the same workshop. *Type* generally signifies a
    number of pieces that share the same image, while a *series* is a
    set of products derived mechanically from a single prototype. See R.
    V. Nicholls, “Type, Group and Series: A Reconsideration of Some
    Coroplastic Fundamentals,” *BSA* 47 (1952), pp. 217–26. The work of
    Nicholls, along with the considerations of Jastrow (E. Jastrow,
    “Abformung und Typenwandel in der antiken Tonplastik,” *OpArch* 2
    \[1941\], pp. 1–28) laid the groundwork for the classification of
    coroplastic art through the identification of prototypes and
    variants, a system that has been thoroughly debated and explored in
    the publications of coroplastic material originally from votive
    deposits in central and southern Italy. This method has
    progressively been imposed upon the systems of classification based
    on stylistic and iconographic analysis. For a summary of the
    problem, see <span class="smcaps">Bonghi
    Jovino</span> 1990, pp. 19–59, and F. Blondé and A. Muller, eds.,
    *L’artisanat en Grèce ancienne: Les productions, les diffusions:
    Actes du colloque de Lyon, 10–11 décembre 1998* (Lille, 2000), pp.
    437–63.

[^2]: On the technical production of the molds, see A. Muller,
    “Artisans, techniques de production, et diffusion: Le cas de la
    coroplathie,” in Blondé and Muller, *L’artisanat en Grèce ancienne*,
    op. cit., pp. 91–106.

[^3]: The clay shrinkage amounts to about 9 to 10 percent. For the most
    part, it takes place during the drying phase and varies according to
    a number of factors, such as the quality of the clay and the
    duration and temperature of the firing.

[^4]: See in this connection: <span
    class="smcaps">Burn and Higgins</span> 2001, pp.
    18–20 and Appendix 2 for the analysis of the white grounds. See also
    V. Brinkmann, “The Polychromy of Ancient Greek Sculpture,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Color of Life</span>* 2008, pp.
    18–39.

[^5]: For the use of color on Hellenistic terracottas, see <span
    class="smcaps">Jeammet et al.</span> 2007 and
    Brinkmann, “Polychromy of Ancient Greek Sculpture,” op. cit.

[^6]: For the technique of production of the statues from Canosa and of
    the Seated Poet group, see the pertinent entries: respectively cat.
    38–42; cat. 1–3.
