---
title: Acknowledgments
---

I extend my sincere and affectionate gratitude to the staff of the J.
Paul Getty Museum, particularly to Claire Lyons, curator of Antiquities,
and Karol Wight, former senior curator of Antiquities, who supported and
encouraged me through the many stages of this project, assuring an
ongoing dialogue that has enriched me and this project enormously. A
grateful acknowledgment goes to Marion True, former curator of
Antiquities, who initially entrusted this project to me in the
conviction that it would be a significant addition to scholarly
knowledge of the Getty collections.

I would also like to thank current and former colleagues in the
Department of Antiquities—Mary Louise Hart, Kenneth Lapatin, Janet
Burnett Grossman, and Alexandra Sofroniew—whose professionalism and
collaboration made my task a privilege and a pleasure. Special thanks
are due to Jerry Podany, former senior conservator of Antiquities, and
to Jeffrey Maish, Susan Lansing Maish, Erik Risser, and Marie Svoboda in
the Department of Antiquities Conservation, for their observations and
contributions on the scientific analysis of several terracottas.
Stimulating discussions of technical problems made me more confident in
my understanding of unusual aspects of some of the terracottas. I am
grateful to Benedicte Gilman, Marina Belozerskaya, Ruth Evans Lane, Greg
Albers, Eric Gardner, Steph Grimes, and other staff at Getty
Publications who made this catalogue a reality.

I am especially grateful to Clemente Marconi, first editor of the
manuscript, and Caterina Greco for their continuing intellectual
generosity and enlightening conversations.

Heartfelt thanks are owed to all the colleagues who offered suggestions
to improve and enrich the work, though responsibility for any errors or
omissions rests with me alone. In particular, it was a privilege to have
the superb guidance of Pietro Giovanni Guzzo, Paola Pelagatti, and
Salvatore Settis, who found the time and patience to read and review
parts of this book. I had stimulating and invaluable conversations with
Gianfranco Adornato, Nunzio Allegro, Nicola Bonacasa, Paolo Carafa, Rosa
Maria Cucco, Maria Antonietta Dell’Aglio, Daniel Graepler, Maria
Costanza Lentini, Enzo Lippolis, Paolo Moreno, Giampaolo Nadalini, Erik
Østby, Nicoletta Poli, Valeria Tardo, Stefano Vassallo, and Carla Aleo
Nero.

My gratitude goes also to my family for their patience in enduring my
preoccupations during the production of the book.
